American Government
Institutions and Policies
TENTH EDITION

james Q. Wilson
University of California, Los Angeles
Pepperdine University

john]. Dilulio, jr.
University of Pennsylvania

H o u g ht o n Mif f lin Co m pa n y
Bosto n

N e w York

For Roberta, Matthew, Rebecca, Annie, and Bob
and Clementine and Sara
J. Q. W.
Dedicated to the memory of Aaron H. Crasner
J. J. D.

Publisher: Charles Hartford
Sponsoring Ed itor: Katherine Meisenheimer
Development Ed itor: Lisa Kainer Williams
Senior Project Ed itor: Caro l Newman
Ed itoria l Assistant: Kristin Craib
Ed itorial Assistant: Robert Woo
Composition Buyer: Chu ck Dutton
Senior Art Editor: Jill Haber
Senior Photo Editor: Jennifer Meyer Dare
Executive Marketing Coordinator: Nicola Poser
Marketing AssociClte: Kathleen Mellon
Cover image: Jim Wehtje/ Getty Images

Copyright © 2006 by Houghton MifOin Company
No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in ao.y form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by
any information storage retrieval system without th e prior written permission
of Houghton MifOin Company unless such copying is expressly permitted by
federal copyright law. Address inquiries to Co llege Permissions, Houghton
MifOin Company, 222 Berkeley Street, Boston , MA 02116-3764.
Printed in U.S.A .
Library of Congress Cata log Number: 2005929290
ISBN: 0-618-55662-1
2 345 6 789 0- VH-09 08 0706

BRIEF CONTENTS
PA R T

I

THE AMERICAN SYSTEM
1
2
3
4
5
6

The Study of American Government
The Constitution 16
Federalism 48
American Political Culture 75
Civil Liberties 97
Civil Rights 124

PART

2

II

OPINIONS , INTERESTS , AND ORGANIZATIONS
7
8
9
10
11
12

Public Opinion 154
Political Participation 177
Political Parties 197
Elections and Campaigns 230
Interest Groups 264
The Media 291

PART

III

INSTITUTIONS OF GOVERNMENT
13
14
15
16

153

315

Congress 316
The Presidency 367
The Bureaucracy 409
The Judiciary 437

PART

IV

THE POLITICS OF PUBLIC POLICY

467

17 The Policy-Making Process 468
18 Economic Policy 491
19 Social Welfare 511
20 Foreign and Military Policy 529
21 Environmental Policy 559

PA RT

V

THE NATURE OF AMERICAN DEMOCRACY
22 Who Governs? To What Ends?

575

576
iii

* CONTENTS
PREl'i\CE xiii
ABOUT TIlE A THORS

PA R T

THE

1

The Motives of the Framers 37
Economic Interests at the Convention 37
Economic Interests and Ratification 38

xv

I

--------------------------AMERICAN SYSTEM 1

The Study of American Government

What Is Political Power? 4
What Is Democracy ? 6
Is Representative Democracy Best? 7
How Is Political Power Distributed? 8
Is Democracy Driven by Self-Interest? 10
What Explains Po litica l Change? 11
The ature of Politics 12

2

The Constitution

The Prob lem of Liberty

16

17

Tile Colonial M ind 18
The Real Revolution 20
Weaknesses oj the ConJederation 21
The Constitutional Convention 22
The Lessons oj Experience 22
The Fra mers 24
The Challenge 25
The Virginia Plan 25
The New Jersey Plan 25
The Compromise 26
The Constitution and Democracy 27
Key Principles 28
Governmellt and Human Nature 29
The Constitution and Liberty 30
The Antifederalist View 31
Needfor a Bill of Rights 35
Tire COllstitution alld Slavery 36

2

The Constitution and Equality 39
Constitutional Reform: Modern Views 40
Reducing the Separation oj Powers 40
Making the System Less Democratic 43
Who Is Right? 45

3

Federalism

48

Governmental Structure 50
Federalism: Good or Bad? 50
Increased Political Activity 52
The Founding 52
A Bold, New Plan 52
Elastic Language 53
The Debate on the Meaning of Federalism
The Supreme Court Speaks 54

Nullification 56
Dual Federalism 57
State Sovereignty 58
Federal-State Relations 60
Grants-in-Aid 60
Meeting Na tional Needs 61
The Intergovernmental Lobby 62
Categorical Grants Versus Revenue Sharing
Rivalry Among the States 65
Federal Aid and Federal Control 66
Mandates 66
Conditions oj Aid 67
A Devolution Revolution? 68
Block GrantsJor Entitlements 69
What's Driving Devolution? 70
Congress and Federalism 70

54

63

v

Contents

vi

4

American Political Culture

6

75

Political Culture 76
The Political System 77
Th e Economic System 79
Comparing America with Other Nations
The Political System 80

Civil Liberties

80

97

Cu lture and Civil Liberties 99
Rights in Conj7ict 99
Cultural Conj7icts 100
Applying the Bill of Rights to the States

124

The Black Predicament

The Economic System 81
The Civic Role of Religion 82
Religion and Politics 83
The Sources of Political Cu lture 84
The Culture War 86
Mistrust of Government 87
Political Efficacy 89
Political Tolerance 91

5

Civil Rights

102
Interpreting and Applying the First Amendment
102
Speech and Nationa l Security 102
What Is Speech? 105
Libel 105
Obscenity 105
Symbolic Speech 108
Who Is a Person? 108
Church and State 110
The Free-Exercise Clause 110
Th e Establishment Clause 111
Crime and Due Process 113
The Exclusionary Rule 114
Search and Seizure II 6
Confessions and Self-Incrimination 117
RelaXing the Exclusionary Rule 118
Terrorism and Civil Liberties 119

126

The Campaign in the Courts 127
"Separate but Equal" 128
Can Separate Schools Be Equal? 129
Brown v. Board of Education 129
The Campaign in Congress

134

Racial Profiling 139
Women and Equal Rights 139
Sexual Harassm ent 142
Privacy and Sex 142
Affirmative Action

144
Equality of Results 144
Equality of Opportunity 145
Gays and the Constitution 149

PART

II

OPINIONS, INTERESTS, AND
ORGANIZATIONS 153

7

Public Opinion

154

What Is Public Opinion? 156
How Polling Works 157
How Opinions Differ 157
Political Socialization: The Family

158

Religion 159
The Gender Gap 160
Schooling and Information 161
Cleavages in Public Opinion 162
Social Class 163
Race and Etlmicity 164
Region 167
Political Ideology 167
Consistent Attitudes 168
What Do Liberalism and Conservatism Mean? 168
Various Categories 169
Analyzing Consistency 169
Political Elites 171
Po litical Elites. Public Opinion. and Pub lic Policy

172

Contents

8

Political Participation

177

A Closer Look at onvoting 178
The Rise of the American Electorate 180
From State to Federal Control 181
Voter Turnout 184
Who Participates in Politics? 187
Forms oj Participation 187
The Causes of Participation 188
The Mea ning of Participation Rates 191

9

Political Parties

197

Parties-Here and Abroad 198
Political Culture 200
The Rise and Decline of the Political Party 201
The Founding 201
Th e /acksonians 202
The Civil War and Sectionalism 203
The Era of Reform 204
Party Realignments 205
Party Dec/ine 207
The Nationa l Party Structure Today 207
Na tional Conventions 209
State and Local Parties 213
The Machine 213
Ideological Parties 2 15
Solidary Groups 2 15
Sponsored Parties 2 16
Personal FollOWing 216
The Two-Party System 217
Minor Parties 220
Nominating a President 223
Are the Delegates Representative of the Voters?
224
Who Votes in Primaries? 224
Who Are the New Delegates? 225
Parties Versus Voters 225

10

Elections and Campaigns

230

Presidential Versus Congressional Campaigns
Running for President 232
Getting Elected to Congress 234
Primary Versus General Campaigns 237
Two Kinds of Campaign Issues 239
TeleviSion, Debates, and Direct Mail 240
Money 244
The Sources of Campaign Money 244
Campaign Finance Rules 246
A Second Campaign Finance Reform 250
New Sources of Money 251
Money and Winning 252
What Decides the Election? 253
Party 254
Issues, Especially the Economy 255
The Campaign 256
Finding a Winning Coalition 257
The Effects of Elections on Policy 259

11

Interest Groups

vii

264

Explaining Proliferation 265
The Birth of Interest Groups 266
Kinds of Organizations 268
Institutional Interests 268
Membership Interests 269
Incentives to Join 270
The Inj1uence of the Staff 272
Interest Groups and Social Movements
The Environmental Movement 274
The Feminist Movement 274
The Union Movement 275
Funds for Interest Groups 276
Foundation Grants 276
Federal Grants and Contracts 276
Direct Mail 277
The Problem of Bias 278

273

232

viii

Contents
The Activiti es of Interest Groups 2 79
Information 279
Public Support: Til e Rise of tile New Politics
Money and PACs 282
Th e "Revolving Door" 284
Trouble 285
Regulating Interest Groups 286

12

The Media

280

291

Journalism in American Political History
Th e Party Press 294

293

The Popular Press 295
Magazines of Opinion 295
Electronic Journalism 296
The Internet 29 7
The Structure of the Media 298
Degree of Competition 2 98
Th e National Media 299
Rules Governing the Media 300
ConJldentiality oj Sources 301
Regulating Broadcasting 301
Campaigning 302
Are the National Media Biased ? 30 3
Government and the News 30 7
Prolllinence oj the President 307
Coverage of Congress 308
Why Do We Have So Many News Leaks? 308
Sensationalism in the Media 3 10
Government Constraints on Journalists 311

PART

III

INSTITUTIONS OF GOVERNMENT
315

13

Congress

316

Congress Versus Parliament 3 18
The Evo lution of Congress 321
Who Is in Congress? 325
Sex and Race 325
Incumbency 326
Party 328

Do Members Represent Their Voters? 33 0
Representatiollal View 33 1
Organizational View 332
Attitudinal View 33 2
Ideology and Civ ili ty in Congress 333
The Organization of Congress: Parties and Caucuses
33 4
Party Organization of the Senate 334
Party Structure in th e HOLi se 335
Til e Strength oj Party Structures 337
Party Unity 33 8

Caucuses 340
The Organization of Congress: Committees 341
The Organization of Congress: Staffs and Specialized
Offices 345
Tasks oj Staff Members 346
Staff Agencies 34 7
How a Bill Becomes Law 34 7
Introducing a Bill 350
Study by Committees 3 50
Floor Debate-Th e HOLise 353
Floor Debate-Til e Senate 353
Methods of Voting 355
Reducing Power and Perks 3 58
The Post-9 / ll Congress 3 59

14

The Presidency

367

Presidents and Prime Ministers 368
Divided Government 370
Does Gridlock Matter? 371
Is Policy Gridlock Bad? 371
The Evolution of the Presidency 372
Concerns oj the Founders 3 72
Tile Electoral College 3 73
Th e President's Term oj OJJlce 373
Th e First Presidents 3 74

Th e Jacksonians 3 75
Th e Reemergence oj Congress 3 77
The Powers of the President 3 79
The Offi ce of the President 380
Tile Wilite House Office 381
Th e Executive Office of the President

383

Contents
The Cabinet 384
Independent Agencies, Commissions, and Judgeships
385
Who Gets Appointed 385
Presidential Character 388
The Power to Persuade 390
The Three Audiences 390
Popularity and Influence 390
The Decline in Popularity 392
The Power to Say 0 394
Veto 394
Executive Privilege 396
Impoundment of Funds 396
The President's Program 397
Putting Together a Program 397
Attempts to Reorganize 399
Presidential Transition 401
The Vice President 401
Problems of Succession 402
Impeachment 403
How Powerful Is the President? 406

15

The Bureaucracy

409

Distinctiveness of the American Bureaucracy 4 10
The Growth of the Bureaucracy 411
Th e Appointment of OfJicials 4 12
A Service Role 412
A Change in Role 4 14
The Federal Bureaucracy Today 414
Recruitment and Retention 415
Personal Attributes 421
Do Bureaucrats Sabotage Their Political Bosses? 422
Culture and Careers 423
Constraints 424
Agency Allies 426
Congressional Oversight 427
Th e Appropriations Committee and Legislative
Committees 428
The Legislative Veto 429
Congressional Investigations 429
Bureaucratic "Pathologies" 430
Reforming the Bureaucracy 432

16

The Judiciary

437

The Development of the Federal Courts 4 39
National Supremacy and Slavery 44 I
Government and the Economy 442
Government and Political Liberty 443

The Revival of State Sovereignty 445
The Structure of the Federal Courts 446
Selecting Judges 446
The Jurisdiction of the Federal Courts 448
Getting to Court 451
Fee Shifting 452
Standing 452
Class-Action Suits 453
The Supreme Court in Action 454
The Power of the Federal Courts 456
Th e Power to Make Policy 456
Views of JudiCial Activism 459
Legislation and the Courts 460
Checks on Judicial Power 460
Congress and the Courts 461
Public Opinion and the Courts 463

PART

IV

THE POLITICS OF PUBLIC POLICY

467

17

The Policy-Making Process

468

Setting the Agenda 469
Th e Legitimate Scope of Government Action 470
Action by the States 473
Making a Decision 473
Majoritarian Politics: Distributed Benefits,
Distributed Costs 475
Interest Group Politics: Concentrated Benefits,
Concentrated Costs 476
Client Politics: Concentrated Benefits, Distributed
Costs 477
Entrepreneurial Politics: Distributed Benefits,
Co ncentrated Costs 478
The Case of Business Regulation 479
Majo ri tarian Politics 480

ix

x

Contents

Interest Group Politics 481
Client Politics 482
Entrepreneurial Politics 484
Perceptions. Beliefs. Interests. and Values
Deregulation 488
The Limits oj Ideas 489

18

Economic Policy

20
487

491

The Politics of Economic Prosperity 494
What Politicians Try to Do 495
The Politics of Taxing and Spending 496
Economic Theories and Political Needs 497
Monetarism 497
Keynesianism 497

Planning 497
Supply-Side Tax Cuts 498
Ideology and Theory 498
"Reaganomics" 498
The Machinery of Economic Policy-Making
The Fed 500
Congress 501
Spending Money 502
The Budget 503
Reducing Spending 504
Levying Taxes 505
The Rise of the Income Tax 507

19

Social Welfare

499

511

Social Welfare in the United States 513
Majoritarian WelJare Programs: Social Security and
Medicare 516
Reforming Majoritarian Welfare Programs 519
Client Welfare Programs: Aid to Families with
Dependent Children 522
Two Kinds of Welfare Politics 523
Majoritarian Politics 523
Client Politics 524

Foreign and Military Policy

529

Kinds of Foreign Policy 531
The Constitutional and Legal Context 532
Presidential Box Score 532
Evaluating the Power oj the President 534
Checks on Presidential Power 536
The Machinery of Foreign Po li cy 537
Foreign Policy and Public Opinion 539
Backing the President 540
Mass Versus Elite Opinion 541
Cleavages Among Foreign Policy Elites 542
How a Worldview Shapes Foreign Policy 542
The Use of Military Force 545
The Defense Budget 547
Total Spending 547
What Do We Get with Our Money? 549
The Structure of Defense Decision-Making 553
Joint ChieJs oj Staff 554
The Services 554

The Chain oj Command 554
The New Prob lem of Terrorism 555

21

Environmental Policy

559

The American Context 561
Entrepreneurial Politics: Globa l Warming 563
Majoritarian Politics: Pollution from Automobiles
564
Interest Group Politics: Acid Rain 566
Client Politics: Agricultural Pesticides 568
The Environmental Uncertainties 569
The Results 572

Contents

PA RT

V

Appendix

THE NATURE OF AMERICAN
DEMOCRACY 575

22

Who Governs? To What Ends?

576

Restraints on the Growth of Government 577
Relaxing the Restraints 578
The Old System 579
The New System 580
Consequences of Activ ist Government 582
The Influence of Structure 585
The Infl uence of Ideas 585

At

The Declaration or Ind ependence Al
The Constitution of the United States A4
The Federalist No. 10 A2l
The Federalist o. 51 A26
Presidents and Congresses. 1789-2 006 A30
GLOSSARY

NOTES

I NDEX
Cl~EDlTS

Gl

Nl

II
Cl

xi

"*
T

J

PREFACE

his Tenth Edition of American Government offers

~tudents

its classic hallmark features and the
latest in politics in America. As before, we show not
only who governs but also what difference- in policies adopted or rejected- it makes in who governs.
We again stress the historical evolution of our practices and institutions, focusing on the importance of
the Constitution and American political culture in
shaping governmental activities. Whenever appropriate, we compare our institutions with other democratic institutions around the globe.
This edition, while retaining the above themes,
has been revised to fit even more closely to how this
course is often taught. For example, we have moved
the chapters on civil liberties and civil rights earlier
in the text; they have now become Chapters 5 and 6.
In order to provide a clearer set of arguments that
link all of the chapters to the central arguments of
Chapter 1, "The Study of American Government,"
we begin each chapter with the questions "Who
Governs ?" and "To What Ends?"; we end each chapter with corresponding summaries ("Reconsidering
Who Governs" and "Reconsidering To What Ends")
of what the reader will have learned about the chapter opening questions. Naturally, the text has been
revised to reflect American government since the
publication of the Ninth Edition. Timely updates
include, among others, the Post-9/ 11 Congress
(including the 9111 Commission) ; the effect of campaign finance reform on civil liberties; a thorough
examination of the 2004 presidential election,
including voter opinions and turnout; the role of
527s on political contributions; and the impact of
the Internet on raising election funds and disseminating news.
This edition keeps the number of boxed items few
in number and clear in focus. For example, each substantive chapter features a "What Would You Do?"
box; this popular feature encourages classroom discussion by highlighting an important policy question
and briefly stating the arguments for and against

each major option. We still offer select "How Things
Work" boxes to give students an understanding of
such procedures in American politics as amending
the Constitution, becoming a U.S. citizen, and qualifying to become a Congressperson. A number of our
"Politically Speaking," "Trivia," and "The 'Rules' of
Politics" boxes are now incorporated in the narrative
of the text or are available online.
Each chapter ends with a Summary, World Wide
Web Resources , and Suggested Readings that provide
students with reference material and preparation for
classroom lectures and examinations.

Learning and Teaching
Ancillaries
The program for American Government, Tenth Ed ition
includes a number of useful learning and teaching
aids. These ancillaries are designed to provide
instructors with useful course management and
presentation tools and to help students get the most
from their American Government course.

For the Instructor
The Instructor's Resource Manual helps instructors plan their course, lectures, and discussion sections. Mary Beth Melchior (Florida International
University) has integrated the IRM with the textbook. Elements new to this edition have been summarized, and the resources and references sections
have been thoroughly updated.
The Test Item File, revised by PS. Ruckman , Jr.
(Rock Valley College) contains over 4,000 multiple
choice, true/false, and essay questions for classroom
use. HM TestingTM, a computerized version of the
Test Item File with flexible test-editing capabilities, is
available on the HM ClassPrep CD-ROM.

xiii

xiv

Preface
In addition to HM Testing, the HM ClassPrep CDROM features other classroom presentation tools,
including an online vers ion of the Instructor's
Resource Manual, video and audio clips, and a set
of PowerPoint® slides of key charts and graphs.
PowerPoint® slides can also be downloaded from
the Instructor's Resource Page (http: // politicalscience.co liege.hmco. com/ instructors).
A newly revised State and Local Government
Supplement, packaged at no cost with American
Government, Tenth Edition, offers material for those
courses that include a unit on state and local politics.

The American Government, Tenth Edition
Web Site, online at http: // politicalscience.college.
hmco.com/students, contains other aids for students, including chapter outlin es, ACE self-quizzes,
What Would You Do? interactive simu lations, add itional "Trivia," "Rules of Politics," and "Politically
Speaking" features, and chapter-specific web links.
The site also links to Crosstabs 4.0. Crosstabs
allows students to cross-tabulate survey data on the
recent Presidential election and the Congressiona l
voting records in order to analyze voter attitudes and
behaviors.

For the Student

Acknowledgelnents

The Student Handbool{ has been thoroughly
updated by PS. Ruckman, Jr. (Rock Valley College) to
help students master the facts and principles in
American Government and prepare for examinations.
For each chapter, the handbook includes focus
points, a study outline, key terms, notes about possible misconceptions, a data check, practice exam
questions, and special application projects, as well as
answers to all the chapter exercises (excluding the
essay questions).

A number of scholars reviewed the Ninth Edition
and made useful suggestions for the Tenth . They
include William Bianco, Pennsy lvania State University; Melvin A. Kulbicki, York Co llege of Pennsylvania; Jeff Gulati, Wellesley Co ll ege; Edward B.
Hasecke, Cleveland State University; Richard Himelfarb, Hofstra University; Thomas Masterson, Butte
College; L. Marvin Overby, University of Missouri;
Donald P Racheter, Centra l College. Additiona l
thanks go to Marc Siegal for his research ass istance.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

James Q. Wilson
James Q. Wilson now teaches
at Pepperdine University.
He is an emeritus professor
of management and public
policy at the University of
California, Los Angeles, and from 1961 to 1987 was
a professor of government at Harvard University.
Raised in California, he received a B.A. degree from
the University of Redlands and Ph.D. from the University of Chicago. Wilson is the author or coauthor
of fourteen books, induding The Marriage Problem
(2002), Moral Judgment (1997), The Moral Sense
(1993), Bureaucracy (1989), Crime and Hwnan Nature
(1985, with Richard J. Herrnstein), Thin king about
Crime (1983), and Political Organizations (1974).
Wilson has served in a number of advisory posts
in the federal government. He was chairman of the
White House Task Force on Crime in 1967, chairman of the National Advisory Council on Drug
Abuse Prevention in 1972-1973, a member of the
Attorney General's Task Force on Violent Crime in
1981, and a member of the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board in 1986-1990.
In 1977 the American Political Science Association
conferred on him the Charles E. Merriam Award for
advancing the art of government through the application of social science knowledge and in 1990 the
James Madison Award for distinguished scholarship.
In 1991-1992 he was President of the Association.
He is a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts
and Sciences and a member of the American Philosophical Society. When not writing, teaching, or
advising, he goes scuba diving. In 2003 Wilson
received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, this
nation's highest civilian award.

John J. Dilulio, Jr.
John J. Dilulio, JI: is a professor of political science at the
University of Pennsylvania
and a senior fellow at the
Brookings Institution. From
1986 to 1999, he was a professor of politics and public affairs at Princeton University's Woodrow Wilson
School of Public and International Affairs. He received
B.A. and M.A. degrees from the University of Pennsylvania and M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from Harvard University. He is the author, coauthor, or editor of a dozen
books, induding What's God Got to Do with the American Experiment? (2000, with E.J. Dionne); Medicaid and
Devolution (1998, with Frank Thompson); and Deregulating the Public Service (1994).
DiIulio advised both Vice President Al Gore and
Governor George W. Bush during the 2000 Presidential campaign. While on leave in academic year
2000-2001, he served as Assistant to the President
of the United States. Over the last decade, he has
advised officials at the National Performance Review,
the Office of Management and Budget, the General
Accounting Office, the U.S. Department of Justice,
and other federal agencies. He has served on the
boards of Big Brothers Big Sisters of America and
other national nonprofit organizations.
In 1995 the Association of Public Policy Analysis
and Management conferred on him the David N.
Kershaw Award for outstanding research achievements and in 1987 he received the American Political Science Association's Leonard D. White Award
in public administration. In 1991-1994 he chaired
the latter association's standing committee on professional ethics.

xv

American Government
Institutions and Policies

In framing a government which is to
be administered by men over men,
the great a~ulty lies in this:
You must first enable the government
to control the governed; and in the
next place ob ige it to control itself.
FEDERALIST

No. 51

CHAPTER

The Study of

American Government

What Is Political Power?
What Is Democracy?
Is Representative Democracy Best?
How Is Power Distributed in a
Democracy?
How Is Political Power Distributed?
Is Democracy Driven by Self-Interest?
What Explains Political Change?
The Nature of Politics

1

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

2.

How is political power actually distributed in America?
What explains major political
change?

2.

What value or values matter most in
American democracy?
Are trade-ofts among political purposes inevitable?

1 A l hen you read the report of the National Commission on Terrorist
V V ~ttacks Upon the United States, better known as the 9 / 11 Commission, you may wonder why many government agencies failed to alert
us. l You may be depressed by the many stories of divided authority, weak
congressional oversight, federal bureaucracies not ta lking to one another,
and countless state and local agencies with no central leadership. You may
well decide, as the Commission did, that the nation has to unify all of these
groups. 2
But unity is rare in American politics. You may think this is the result of
idiots fa ili ng to do their jobs. But if you think that, you have not read this
book.
Politics exists in part because people differ about two things: who should
govern, and the ends toward which they should work.
We want to know the answer to the first question because we believe that
those who rule- their personalities and beliefs, their virtues and viceswill a/Tect what they do to and for us. Many people think they already know
the answer to the question, and they are prepared to talk and vote on that
basis. That is their right, and the opinions they express may be correct. But
they may also be wrong. Indeed , many of these opinions must be wrong
because they are in conflict. When asked, "Who governs?" some people will
say "the unions" and some will say "big business"; others will say "the
politicians, " "the people, " or "the special interests. " Still others will say
"Wall Street," "the military," "crackpot liberals," "the media," "the bureaucrats," or "white males." Not all these answers can be correct-at least not
all of the time.
The answer to the second question is important because it tells us h ow
government affects our lives. We want to know not on ly who governs, but
what difference it makes who governs. In our day-to-day lives we may not
think government makes much difference at all. In one sense that is right,
because our most pressing personal concerns- work, play, love, family,
health- are essentia lly private matters on which government touches but
slightly. But in a larger and longer perspective government makes a substantial difference. Consider: in 1935 , 96 percent of all American families
paid no federal income tax, and for the 4 percent or so who did pay, the average rate was only about 4 percent of their incomes. Today almost all families pay federal payroll taxes, and the average rate is 21 percent of their
incomes. Or consider: in 1960, in many parts of the country, African Americans could ride only in the backs of buses, had to use washrooms and
3

4

Chapter 1

The Study oj American Govern ment

Why Government Matters: A Top Ten list
Based on a survey of 450 history and political science professors and an analysis of over 500 pu blic
statutes. here is one list of the government's top
ten post-19 50 achievements.

3. Promoted equal access to public accommodations
2. Expanded the right to vote
1. Rebuilt Europe after World War II

10. Promoted financial security in retirement
9. Reduced the federal budget deficit
8. Increased access to hea lth care for older
Americans
7. Strengthened the nation's highway system
6. Ensured safe food and drinking water
5. Reduced workplace discrimination
4. Reduced disease

As you read this book (especially Chapters 17
through 21 on public policy issues) and study
American government. ponder what might be on
the top ten list for the first quarter of the twentyfirst century.

drinking fountains that were labeled "colored." and
could not be served in most public restaurants. Such
restrictions have been almost eliminated. in large
part because of decisions by the federal government.
It is important to bear in mind that we wish to
answer two different questions. and not two versions
of the same question. You cannot always predict
what goals government will estab lish knowing only
who governs. nor can you always tell who governs by
knowing what activities government undertakes.
Most people holding national political office are
middle-class. middle-aged. white Protestant males.
but we cannot then conclude that the government
will adopt only poliCies that are to the narrow advantage of the middle class. the midd le-aged. whites.
Protestants. or men. If we thought that. we would be
at a loss to explain why the rich are taxed more heavily than the poor. why the War on Poverty was
declared. why constitutional amendments giving
rights to African Americans and women passed Congress by large majorities. or why Catholics and Jews
have been appointed to so many important governmental posts.
This book is chiefly devoted to answering the question. Who governs? It is written in the belief that this

power

The ability of one person to get another
person to act in accordance with the first person 's intentions.

Source: Adapted from Paul C. Light, "Government's Greatest
Achievements of the Past Half Cent ury," Reform Watch Brief #2,
Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., November 2000.
Reprinted by permission of the Brookings Institution .

question cannot be answered without looking at how
government makes-or fails to make-decisions
about a large variety of concrete issues. Thus in this
book we shall inspect government policies to see what
individuals, groups, and institutions seem to exert the
greatest power in the continuous struggle to define
the purposes of government. We shall see that power
and purpose are inextricably intertwined.

What Is Political Power?
By power we mean the ability of one person to get
another person to act in accordance with the first
person's intentions. Sometimes an exercise of power
is obvious, as when the president tells the air force
that it cannot build a new bomber or orders soldiers
into combat in a foreign land. Some claim it is exercised in subtle ways that may not be evident even to
the participants, as when the preSident's junior
speechwriters. reflecting their own evolving views,
adopt a new tone when writing for their boss about
controversial social issues like abortion. The speechwriters may not think they are using power-after
all, they are the president's subordinates and may
rarely see him face-to-face. But if the president lets
their words exit his mouth in public. they have used
power.
Power is found in all human relationships, but we
shall be concerned here only with power as it is used
to affect who will hold government office and how

What Is Po litical Power?
government will behave. This fails to take into
account many important things. If a corporation
closes a factory in a small town where it was the
major employer, it is using power in ways that affect
deeply the lives of people. When a university refuses
to admit a student or a medical society refuses to
license a would-be physician, it is also using power.
But to explain how all these things happen would be
tantamount to explaining how society as a whole,
and in aU its particulars, operates. We limit our view
here to government, and chiefly to the American fed eral government. However, we shall repeatedly pay
special attention to how things once thought to be
"private" matters become "public"-that is, how
they manage to become objects of governmental
action. Indeed, one of the most striking transformations of American politics has been the extent to
which, in recent decades, almost every aspect of
human life has found its way onto the governmental
agenda. In the 19 50s the federal government would
have disp layed no interest in a factory closing its
doors , a university refusing an applicant, or a profession not accrediting a member. Now government
actions can and do affect all these things.
People who exercise political power mayor may
not have the authority to do so. By authority we
mean the right to use power. The exercise of rightfu l
power- that is, of authority-is ordinarily easier
than the exercise of power that is not supported by
any persuasive claim of right. We accept decisions ,
often without question, if they are made by people
who we believe have the right to make them; we may
bow to naked power because we cannot resist it, but
by our recalcitrance or our resentment we put the
users of naked power to greater trouble than the
wielders of authority. In this book we will on occasion speak of "forma l authority." By this we mean
that the right to exercise power is vested in a governmental office. A pres ident, a senator, and a federal
judge have formal authority to take certain actions.
What makes power rightful varies from time to
time and from country to country. In the United
States we usually say that a person has political
authority if his or her right to act in a certain way is
conferred by a law or by a state or nationa l constitution. But what makes a law or constitution a source
of right? That is the question of le gitimacy. In the
United States the Constitution today is widely, if not
unanimously, accepted as a source of legitimate
authority, but that was not always the case.

To enter the United States, foreigners must now produce a
photograph and jingerprints.

Much of American political history has been a
struggle over what constitutes legitimate authority.
The Constitutional Convention in 1787 was an effort
to see whether a new, more powerful federal government could be made legitimate; the succeeding administrations of George Washington, John
Adams, and Thomas Jefferson were in large measure
preoccupied with disputes over the kinds of decisions
that were legitimate for the federal government to
make. The Civil War was a bloody struggle over the
legitimacy of the federal union; the ew Deal of
Frankli n Roosevelt was hotly debated by those who
disagreed over whether it was legitimate for the federal government to intervene deeply in the economy.
During the 2004 presidential contest, even many
citizens who took the same view on a hot-button
question like gay marriage disagreed over wheth er
it was legitimate to address the issue through an
amendment to the Constitution that banned it
nationally or whether the matter ought to be left for
each state to decide.
On one thing, however, Virtually all Americans
seem to agree: no exercise of political power by government at any level is legitimate if it is not in some

authority The right to use power.
legitimacy Political authority conferred by law
or by a state or national constitution .

5

6

Chapter 1

The Study of American Government

~ What Is Denlocracy?

Iraqis cheer American soldiers who were helping distribute
humanitarian aid.

sense democratic. That was hardly always the prevailing view. In 1787, as the Constitution was being
debated , Alexander Hamilton worried that the new
government he helped create might be too democratic, while George Mason, who refused to sign the Constitution, worried that it was not democratic enough.
Today. however, almost everyone believes that democratic government is the only proper kind. Most people believe that American government is democratic;
some believe that other institutions of public lifeschools, universities, corporations, trade unions,
churches-should also be run on democratic principles if they are to be legitimate; and some insist that
promoting democracy abroad ought to be a primary
purpose of u.s. foreign policy.
Whether democracy is the best way of governing
all institutions and whether promoting democracy
either has been or ought to be a major objective of
u.s. foreign policy are both worthwhile questions.
The former question goes beyond the scope of this
book, but we will touch upon the latter question in
Chapter 20.

democ racy The rule of the many.
direct or participatory democracy

A government in which all or most citizens participate
directly.

representative democracy

A government in
which leaders make decisions by winning a
competitive struggle for the popular vote .

De mocracy is a word with at least two different
meanings. First, the term democracy is used to
describe those regimes that come as close as possible
to Aristotle's definition-the "rule of the many." 3 A
government is democratic if all, or most, of its citizens participate directly in either holding office or
making policy. This is often called di rect or participatory democracy. In Aristotle's time-Greece in
the fourth century B.c.-such a government was
possible. The Greek city-state. or po/is, was quite
small, and within it citizenship was extended to all
free adult male property holders. (Slaves, women,
minors , and those without property were excluded
from participation in government.) In more recent
times the New England town meeting approximates
the Aristotelian ideal. In such a meeting the adult citizens of a community gather once or twice a year to
vote directly on all major issues and expenditures of
the town. As towns have become larger and issues
more complicated, many town governments have
abandoned the pure town meeting in favor of either
the representative town meeting (in which a large
number of elected representatives, perhaps two or
three hundred, meet to vote on town affairs) or representative government (in which a small number of
elected city councilors make decisions).
The second definition of democracy is the principle of governance of most nations that are called
democratic. It was most concisely stated by the economist Joseph Schumpeter: "The democratic method
is that institutional arrangement for arriving at political decisions in which individuals [that is, leaders]
acquire the power to decide by means of a competitive struggle for the people's vote."4 Sometimes this
method is called, approvingly, representative
de mocracy; at other times it is referred to, disapprovingly, as the elitist theory of democracy. It is justified by one or both of two arguments: First, it is
impracticaL owing to limits of time, information,
energy. interest, and expertise, for the people to
decide on public policy, but it is not impractical to
expect them to make reasonable choices among competing leadership groups. Second, some people
(including, as we sh all see in the next chapter, many
of the Framers of the Constitution) believe that direct
democracy is likely to lead to bad decisions. because
people often decide large issues on the basis of fJeet-

Is Representative Democracy Best?

Can a Democracy Fight a War Against Terrorists?
On September II, 2001, a date that will forever
more be referred to as 9111, war came to the
United States when terrorists crashed four
hijacked airliners, filled with passengers, into the
two towers of the World Trade Center in New York
City, into the Pentagon in Washington, D.C., and
into some empty land in Pennsylvania. About
three thousand people were killed.
How can a democratic nation respond to a war
waged, not by an enemy nation, but by a loose collection of terrorists with cells in many parts of the
world ? America's new war against terrorism is
much more difficult to fight than the one against
Nazi Germany and the Japanese warlords in 1941.

Americans felt powerfully connected to their jeIlow citizens in the immediate aftermath of 9/11.

ing passions and in response to popular demagogues.
This concern about direct democracy persists today,
as can be seen from the statements of leaders who do
not like what voters have decided. For example, in
2000 voters in Michigan overwhelmingly rejected a
referendum that would have increased public funding for private schools. Politicians who opposed the
defeated referendum spoke approvingly of the "will
of the people," but politicians who favored it spoke
disdainfully of "mass misunderstanding."

Is Representative
Denlocracy Best?
Whenever the word democracy is used alone in this
book, it will have the meaning Schumpeter gave it.

• How can we reorganize the military so that it
can respond swiftly and effectively against small
targets?
• Is it constitutional to try captured terrorists in
military tribunals?
• How much new law enforcement authority
should be given to police and investigative
agencies?
• Should America invade nations that support
terrorists?
In the years ahead, these questions will raise
profound challenges for American democracy.

As we discuss in the next chapter, the men who
wrote the Constitution did not use the word democracy in that document. They wrote instead of a "republican form of government," but by that they meant
what we call "representative democracy." Whenever
we refer to that form of democracy involving the
direct participation of all or most citizens. we shall
use the term direct or participatory democracy.
For representative government to work, there must,
of course, be an opportunity for genuine leadership
competition. This requires in turn that individuals and
parties be able to run for office, that communication
(through speeches or the press, and in meetings) be
free, and that the voters perceive that a meaningful
choice exists. Many questions still remain to be
answered. For instance: How many offices should be
elective and how many appointive? How many candidates or parties can exist before the choices become

7

8

Chapter 1

The Study of American Government

hopelessly confused? Where will the money come from
to nnance electoral campaigns? There is more than one
answer to such questions. In some European democracies. for example. very few offices--often just those in
the national or local legislature-are elective. and
much of the money for campaigning for these offices
comes [rom the government. In the United States many
offices-executive and judicial as well as legislativeare elective. and most of the money the candidates use
for campaigning comes from industry. labor unions.
and private individuals.
Some people have argued that the virtues of direct
or participatory democracy can and should be
reclaimed even in a modern. complex society. This
can be done either by allowing individual neighborhoods in big cities to govern themselves (community
control) or by requiring those affected by some government program to participate in its formulation
(citizen participation). In many states a measure of
direct democracy exists when voters can decide on
referendum issues- that is. policy choices that
appear on the ballot. The proponents of direct
democracy defend it as the only way to ensure that
the "will of the people" prevails.
The Framers of the Constitution did not think
that the "wiJI of the people" was synonymous with
th~ "common interest" or the "public good ." They
strongly favored representative democracy over direct
democracy. They believed that government should
mediate. not mirror. popular views. and that elected
officials should represent. not register. majority sentiments. They supposed that most citizens did not have
the time. information. interest. and expertise to make
reasonable choices among competing policy positions. They suspected that even highly educated people could be manipulated by demagogic leaders who
played on their fears and prejudices. They granted
that representative democracy often proceeds slowly
and prevents sweeping changes in policy. but they
cautioned that a government capable of doing great
good quickly also can do great harm quickly. They
agreed that majority opinion should figure in the
enactment of many or most government policies. but
they insisted that the protection of civil rights and
civil liberties- the right to a fair trial; the freedom of
speech. press. and religion; or the right to vote itselfought never to hinge on a popular vote. Above all.
they embraced representative democracy because
they saw it as a way of minimizing the chances that
power would be abused either by a tyrannical popular
majority or by self-serving officeholders.

Clearly. the Framers of the Constitution thought
that representative democracy was best. but were they
right? Any answer must address two related questions:
Ilrst. even if the Framers' assumptions about direct
democracy being impractical and likely to lead to bad
decisions were correct for their time. are they equally
correct in ours?; and. second. should American political history be read more nearly to justify or to jettison
the Framers' faith that representative democracy
would help to protect minority rights and prevent
politicians from using public offices for private gains?
The first question asks whether people today have
more time. information. energy. interest. and expertise. or more ability to gather together for collective
decision-making. than they did when the Constitution was adopted. To decide. one should know how
the Internet has vastly expanded access to political
information as well as how little most people consume political news.

How Is Political Power
Distributed?
The second question asks how political power has
actually been distributed in America's representative
democracy. Scholars differ in their interpretations of
the American political experience. Where some see
a steady march of democracy. others see no such
thing; where some emphasize how voting and other
rights have been steadily expanded. others stress
how they were denied to so many for so long. and so
forth. Short of attempting to reconcile these competing historical interpretations. let us step back now for
a moment to our definition of representative democracy and four competing views about how political
power has been distributed in America.
Representative democracy is defined as any system of government in which leaders are authorized
to make decisions- and thereby to wield political
power- by winning a competitive struggle for the
popular vote. It is obvious then that very different sets
of hands can control political power. depending on
what kinds of people can become leaders. how the
struggle for votes is carried on. how much freedom to
act is given to those who win the struggle. and what
other sorts of influence (besides the desire for popular approva l) affect the leaders' actions.
In some cases the leaders will be so sharply constrained by what most people want that the actions of

How Is Political Power Distributed?
officeholders will follow the preferences of citizens
very closely. We shall call such cases exa mples of
majorita rian politics. In this case elected officials are
the delegates of the people, acting as the people (or a
majority of them) would act were the matter put to a
popular vote. The issues handled in a majoritarian
fash ion can be only those that are sufflciently important to command the attention of most citizens, sufficiently clear to elicit an informed opinion from
citizens, and sufficiently feasib le to address so that
what citizens want done can in fact be done.
When circumstances do not permit majoritarian
decision-making, then some group of officials will
have to act without knowing (and perhaps without
caring) exactly what people want. Indeed, even on
issues that do evoke a clear opinion from a majority
of citizens, the shaping of the details of a policy will
reflect the views of those people who are suffiCiently
motivated to go to the troub le of becoming active
participants in policy-making. These active participants usually will be a small, and probab ly an unrepresentative, minority. Thus the actual distribution of
political power, even in a democracy, will depend
importantly on the composition of the political elites
who are actually involved in the struggles over policy.
By e lite we mean an identifiable group of persons
who possess a disproportionate share of some valued
resource- in this case, political power.
There are at least four different schools of thought
about political elites and how power has actually been
distributed in America's representative democracy:
Marxist, power elite, bureaucratic, and pluralist. The
German philosopher Karl Marx (1818- 1883) was
the founder of modern socialist thought. There are
many variants of Marxist ideology. Essentially, however, the Marxist view is that government, even if
democratic in form , is merely a refl ection of underlying economic forces. 5 Marxists hold that in modern
societies, two economic classes contend for powercapitalists (business owners or the "bourgeoise") and
workers (laborers or the "proletariat"). Whichever
class dominates the economy also controls the government, which is, they reckon. nothing more than
a piece of machinery designed to express and give
legal effect to underlying class interests. In the United
States. Marxists maintain, capitalists (especially "big
business" and today's "multinational corporations"
headquartered in America) have genera lly dominated the economy and hence the government.
A second theory, closely related to the first. was
started by C. Wright Mil ls. a famous mid-twentieth-

century American sociologist. To him. a coalition of
three groups- corporate leaders. top mi li tary officers. and a handful of elected officials- dominate
politics and government. 6 Today, some add to Mills's
triumvirate major communications media chiefs , top
labor union officials, the heads of various specialinterest groups, and others. But the essential power
e li te view is the same: American democracy is actually dominated by a few top leaders, most of whom
are outside of government and enjoy great advantages in wealth. status. or organizational position.
The third theory was shaped by the German scholar,
Max Weber (1864- 1920), a founder of sociology. To
Weber, the dominant social and political reality of modern times was that all institutions. governmental
and nongovernmental, have fallen under the control of
large bureaucracies whose expertise and competence
are essential to the management of contemporary
affairs? Capitalists or workers may come to power (as
in the Marxist view). or coalitions of well-pOSitioned
elites may dominate government and the legislative
process (as in the power elite view), but the government
they create and the laws they enact will be dominated
in either case by bureaucrats who staff and operate the
government on a daily basis. This bureau cra tic view
suggests that power is mainly in the hands. not of
American democracy's elected representatives. but in
those of its appointed officials. career government
workers who, though they may be virtually invisible to
most average citizens and unknown to most elites.
nonetheless exercise vast power by deciding how to
translate public laws into administrative actions. In this
view. government bureaucrats do not merely implement public poLicies, they effectively "make" them as
suits their own ideas and interests.
Fourth is the pluralist view. It has no single
intellectual parent, but it has many fo llowers in

e lite

Persons who possess a disproportionate
share of som e valu ed resource, like money or
pow er.

Ma r xist vie w

View th at the governm ent is
dom inated by capitalists.
power elite vie w View that the govern me nt is
dominat ed by a few top leaders, most of
w hom are outside of government.

bureaucra tic view

View that th e government
is domin at ed by appoi nted offic ials.
pluralist view Th e belief th at competit ion
among all affected interests sha pes publ ic po licy.

9

10

Chapter 1

The Study of American Government

contemporary politi ca l science and in journa lism.
Pluralists acknowledge that big busin esses, cozy
elites, or career bureaucrats may dominate on some
issues, but stress that political resources, such as
mon ey, prestige, expertise, organizationa l position .
and access to the mass media, are so widely scattered
in American society that no single elite has anything
like a monopoly on them. 8 Furthermore, pluralists
point out, in America, there are so many governmental institutions in which power may be exercisedcity, state, and rederal governments and, within
these, the offices of mayors, managers, legislators.
governors, presidents, judges, burea ucrats- that no
single group, even ir it had many political resources,
could dominate most, or even much , of the political
process. Instead, many poli cies are the outcome of a
complex pattern of political haggling , innumerable
compromises. a nd shirting alliances. What government does is arrected to varying degrees not only by
competing groups of elites inside or outside government but by mass public opinion as well.
Pluralists do not go so far as to argue that politica l
resources are distributed equally-that would be tantamount to saying th at a ll decisions are made on a
majoritarian basis. After reviewing recent evidence. in
2004 the American Political Science Association's
Task Force on Inequality and American Democracy
concluded that "political input" and the "exercise of
political voice" in Americcill democracy are "extremely unequa l" and "stratifted most fund a mentally by
social class."9 But the APSA task force also noted
that, though such inequaliti es seem "especially
pronounced in the United States," they exist "in all
democracies."l0 It also expressed uncertainty about
whether recent increases in economic inequality had
much, ir a ny, impact either on long-observed socioeconomic diJl'erences in patterns or political participation,
or on particular government policies and programs.
Thu s, acknow ledging strong evidence about
inequalities in American democracy, pluralists ma inta in that political resources nonetheless remain su(~
fi ciently divided among such dirrerent kinds of eli tes
(business peopl e, politicians, union lea ders, journalists, bureaucrats , professors, env ironmentali sts,
lawyers, and whomever else) that all , or a lmost all ,
relevant interests have a chance to affect the outcome of decisions. Not only are the elites divided,
they are responsive to their followers' interests, a nd
thus they provide representation to a lmost a ll citizens affected by a policy.

Is Deillocracy Driven
by Self-Interest?
or the four views of how political power has been distributed in the United States, the pluralist view does
the most to reassure one that America has been, and
continues to be, a democracy in more tha n name
only. But the pluralist view, not less than the other
three, may lead some people to the cy ni ca l co nclusion that, which ever view is correct, politics is a
self-seeking enterprise in wh ich everybody is out for
personal ga in . Though there is surely plenty of selfinterest among politi ca l elites (at least as much as
there is among college or high school students!) , it
does not necessa rily follow that the res ulting policies wi ll be who lly se l(~ se rvin g. Nor does it follow that
democracy itself is dri ven ma inly or solely by people's
baser motives or selfi sh desires.
For one thing, a policy may be good or bad independent of the motives of the person who decided it,
just as a product sold on the market may be u seful
or useless regardless of the profit-seekin g or wageseekin g motives of those who produced it. For another thing. the self-interest of individu a ls is orten an
incomplete guide to their actions. People must frequently choose between two courses of action , neither of which has an obvious "payoff " to them. We
caution aga inst the cynical explanati on of politics
that Americans seem espec ially pro ne to adopt.
Alexis de Tocq ueville, the French author of a perceptive account of American life and politics in the early
nineteenth century, noticed this trait among us.
Americans ... are fond of explaining almost all
the action s of their lives by the prin ciple of sel1~
interest rightly understood .. .. In this respect I
think th ey frequently fa il to do themselves justice; for in the United States as well as elsewhere people are sometimes seen to give way to
those di sinterested and spontaneo us impulses
that are natural to man ; but the Americans seldom admit that they yield to emotions or this
kind; they are more anxious to do honor to
their philosophy than to themselves. 1 ]
The belief that people will usually act on the basis
of their self-interest, narrowly defined , is a theory to
be tested, not an assumption to be made. Sometimes,
as happened in New York City on September II.
2001 , elected officials, government workers, and

What Explains Political Change?
average citizens behave in ways that plainly transcend perso nal or professiona l self-in terest. There
are countless other fa r less dra matic bu t sti ll telling
exa mples of people acting publicly in ways that
seem anything but self-interested. For exampl e. in the
1960s leaders of the AFL-CIO in Wash ington were
a mong the most influential forces lobbying Congress
for the passage of certa in civil rights bills. Yet at the
time they did this. the leaders did not stand to benefit
either personally (they were almost all white) or organizationally (rank-and-ftle labor union members were
not enthusiastic about such measures). l2 To understand why they took these positions. it is not enough
to know their incomes or their jobs; one must also
know something about their attitudes. their allies.
and the temper of the times. In short. political preferences cannot invariably be predicted simply by knowing economic or organizational position.
Yet another reason to resist interpreting American
democracy as if it were always and everywhere driven
by narrowly self-interested individuals and groups is
that many of the most important political happenings
in U.S. history-the revolutionary movement of the
1770s a nd 1 780s. the battle for civil rights in the
195 Os and 1960s. to na me just two--were led against
long odds by people who risked much knowing that
they might not succeed a nd suspectin g that. even if
they did succeed. generations might pass before their
efforts truly benefited anyone. As we shall see. sell~
interest fi gures mightily in politics. but so do ideas
about the common good and public-spirited behavior.

What Explains Political
Change?
When we see American democracy from the perspective of the past. we will find it hard to accept
as generally true any simple interpretation of politics.
Economic interests. powerful elites. e ntrench ed
burea ucrats. competin g pressure groups. and morally impassioned individuals have all played a part
in shapin g our government an d its policies. But the
great shifts in the character of our government- its
size, scope. institutiona l ar range ments. a nd the
direction of its policies- have reflected compl ex and
sometimes sudden changes in elite or mass beliefs
about what government is supposed to do.
In the 1920s it was widely assumed that the federa l government wou ld playa sma ll role in our li ves.
Prom the 1930s through the 19 70s it was generally

11

New York City Mayor Rudy Giulialli discusses the fallen World
Trade Center towers with President George Bush. Senator Charles
Sclullfla and New York Fire Commissioner Thomas Van Essen.

beli eved that the federa l government would try to
so lve whatever social or economi c problem existed.
From 1981 through 1988 the administration of
Ronald Reagan sought to reverse that assumption
and to cut ba ck on the taxes Washington lev ied. the
money it spent. a nd the regulations it imposed. It is
clea r that no simple theory of politics is likely to
explain both the growth of federal power after 1932
and the effort to cut back on th at power starting in
1981. Every student of politics sooner or later learns
that the hardest things to explain are usually the
most important ones.
Take the case of foreign affairs. During certain periods in our history we have taken an active interest in
the outside world-at the time the nation was founded.
when Prance and England seemed to have it in their
power to determine whether or not America would survive as a nation; in the 1840s. when we sought to
expand the nation into areas where Mexico and Canada had claims; in the late 1890s. when many leaders
believed we had an obligation to acquire an overseas
empire in the Caribbean and the Pacific; and in the period from the 1940s to the 1960s. when we openly
accepted the role of the world 's police officer. At other
times America has looked inward. spurning opportunities for expansion a nd virtually ignorin g even ts that in
other periods would have been a ca use for war. or at
least mobilization. Today. America seems to be looking outward once again. spurred, on the one side. by

12

Chapter 1

The Study of American Govermllel1t

unprecedented terrorist attacks against the country
and, on the other side, by historic opportunities to
make new friends with old foreign foes .
Deep-seated beliefs. major economic developments. and widely shared (or competing) opinions
about what constitutes the dominant political problem of the time shape the nature or day-to-day politica l conflict. What this means is that, in any broad
historical or comparative perspective, politics is not
just about "who gets what," though that is part of the
story. It is about how people, or elites claiming to
speak for people, define the public interest. Lest one
think that such defInitions are mere window dressing,
signifying nothing of importance, bear in mind that
on occasion men and women have been prepared to
fight and die for one definition or another. Suppose
you had been alive in 1861. Do you think you would
have viewed slavery as a matter or gains and losses.
costs and beneilts, winners and losers? Some people
did. Or do you think you would have been willing to
fight to abolish or preserve it? Many others did just
that. The differences in these ways of thinking about
such an issue are at least as important as how institutions are organized or elections conducted.

The Nature of Politics
Ideally. political scientists ought to be able to give
clear answers. amply supported by evidence. to the
questions we have posed about American democracy.
starting with "who governs?" In reality they can (at
best) give partial. contingent. and controversial
answers. The reason is to be found in the nature of
our subject. Unlike economists. who assume that
people have more or less stable preferences and can
compare ways of satisfying those preferences by
looking at the relative prices of various goods and
services. political scientists are interested in how
preferences are formed . especia lly for those kinds of
services. such as national defense or pollution control. that cannot be evaluated chiel'ly in terms of
monetary costs.
Understanding preferences is vital to understanding
power. Who did what in government is not hard to nnd
out. but who wielded power- that is. who made a difference in the outcome and for what reason- is much
harder to discover. Power is a word that conjures up
images of deals. bribes. power plays. and arm-twisting.
In fact. most power exists because of shared understanding. common friendships. communal or organiza-

tiona! loyalties, and different degrees of prestige. These
are hard to identify and almost impossible to quantify.
Nor can the distribution of political power be
inferred simply by knowing what laws are on the
books or what administrative actions have been
taken. The enactment of a consumer protection law
does not mean that consumers are powerful, any
more than the absence of such a law means that corporations are powerful. The passage of such a law
could reflect an aroused public opinion, the lobbying
of a small group claiming to speak for consumers.
the ambitions of a senator. or the intrigues of one
business firm seeking to gain a competitive advantage over another. A close analysis of what the law
entails and how it was passed and administered is
necessary before much of anything can be said.
This book will avoid sweeping claims that we have
an "imperial" presidency (or an impotent one), an
"obstructionist" Congress (or an innovative one), or
"captured " regulatory agencies. Such labels do an
injustice to the different roles that preSidents, members of Congress. and administrators play in different
kinds of issues and in different historical periods.
The view taken in this book is that judgements
about institutions and interests can be made only
after one has seen how they behave on a variety of
important issues or potential issues, such as economic policy. the regulation of business. socia l welfare.
civil rights and liberties. and foreign and military
affairs. The policies adopted or blocked, the groups
heeded or ignored. the values embraced or rejectedthese constitute the raw material out of which one
can fashion an answer to the central questions we
have asked: Who governs? and To what ends?
The way in which our institutions of government
handle social welfare, for example, differs from the
way other democratic nations handle it, and it differs
as well from the way our own institutions once treated it. The description of our institutions in Part III
will therefore include not only an account of how
they work today but also a brief historical background on their workings and a comparison with
simi lar institutions in other countries. There is a tendency to assume that how we do things today is the
only way they could possibly be done. In fact. there
are other ways to operate a government based on
some measure of popular ru le. History. tradition. and
belief weigh heavily on all that we do.
Although political change is not always accompanied by changes in public laws. the policy process is
arguably one of the best barometers of changes in who

~egal and Policy Experts
~l! f~r a Ban on Ballot

InItIatIves
December II

SACRAMENTO, CA

To: Govern or Steve Finore
From: Edward Heron, chief policy adviser
Subject: Initiative Repeal

A report released
than 100 law and pUbi;~ste~~ay and signed by more
urges that the state's
P? ICy professors stateWide
I .I .
constltutlO b
egIs atlOn by initiative The . n . e amended to ban
voters to place Ie . I .'
inItiative allows stat
bI
gls atlve me
.
e
" a lot by getting enou h . asures dIrectly on the
has led to disastrousg sIgnatures. The initiative
crime, and othe'
"policy decisions on tax
r ISSues, the report declared . ' . es,

You have supported several successful initiatives (l ife imprisonment for thrice-convicted violent felons, property
tax limits), but you have never publicly stated a view on the initiative itself,
and the repeal proposal will probably surface during tomorrow's press briefing .
Arguments for a ban:
1. Ours is a representative, not a direct, democracy in which voters elect leaders and
elected leaders make policy decisions subject to review by the courts.
2. Voters are often neither rational nor respectful of constitutional rights. For
example, many people demand both lower taxes and more government services,
and polls find that most voters would prohibit people with certain views from
speaking and deprive all persons accused of a violent crime from getting out on
bail while awaiting trial.
3. Over the past 100 years nearly 800 statewide ballot initiatives have been passed
in 24 states, including 35 in 1998 alone. Rather than giving power to the people,
special-interest groups have spent billions of dollars manipulating voters to pass
in it iatives that enrich or benefit them, not the public at large.
Arguments against a ban:
1. When elected officials fail to respond to persistent public majorities favoring
tougher crime measures, lower property taxes, and other popular concerns, direct
democracy via the initiative is legitimate, and the courts can still review the law.
2. More Americans than ever have college degrees and easy access to information
about public affairs. Studies find that most average citizens are able to figure out
which candidates, parties, or advocacy groups come closest to supporting their own
economic interests and personal values.
3. All told, the 24 states that passed 35 laws by initiative in 1998 also passed more
than 14,000 laws by the regular legislative process (out of more than 70,000 bills
they considered) . Studies find that special-interest groups are severely limited in
their ability to pass new laws by initiative, wh ile citizens' groups with broad-based
public support are behind most initiatives that pass.
Your decision:
Favor ban _ __

Oppose ban _ __ _

Chapter 1

14

The Study of American Government

governs. In Chapter 15. we offer a way of classifying
and explaining the politics of different policy issues.
The model we present there has been developed.
refmed. and tested over more than two decades (longer
than most of our readers have been alive!). Our own
students and others have valued it mainly because.
they have found. it helps to answer such questions
about who governs: How do political issues get on the
public agenda in the nrst place? How. for example. did
sexual harassment. which was hardly ever discussed or
debated by Congress. burst onto the public agenda?
Once on the agenda. how does the politics of issues like
income security for older Americans-for example. the
politics of Social Security. a program that has been on
the federal books since 19 35 (see Chapter 19)change over time? And if. today. one cares about
expanding civil liberties (see Chapter 5) or protecting
civil rights (see Chapter 6). what political obstacles

'*

and opportunities are you likely to face. and what role
are public opinion. organized interest groups. the
media. the courts. political parties. and other institutions likely to play in frustrating or fostering your particular policy preferences. whatever they might be?
Peek ahead. if you wish. to the book's policy chapters. but understand that the place to begin a search
for how power is distributed in national politics and
what purposes that power serves is with the founding of the federal government in 1787: the Constitutional Convention and the events leading up to it.
Though the decisions of that time were not made by
philosophers or professors. the practical men who
made them had a philosophic and professorial cast of
mind. and thus they left behind a fairly explicit
account of what values they sought to protect and
what arrangements they thought ought to be made
for the allocation of political power.

SUMMARY

T

here are two major questions about politics:
Who governs? To what ends? This book focuses
mainly on answering the nrst.
Four answers have traditionally been given to the
question of who governs.
• The Marxist- those who control the economic
system will control the political one.
• The elitist- a few top leaders. not all of them
drawn from business. make the key decisions
without reference to popular desires.
• The bureaucratic- appointed civil servants run
things.
• The pluralist- competition among affected interests shapes public policy.

To choose among these theories or to devise new
ones requires more than describing governmental
institutions and processes. In addition one must
examine the kinds of issues that do (or do not) get
taken up by the political system and how that system
resolves them .
The distinction between different types of democracies is important. The Framers of the Constitution
intended that America be a representative democracy in which the power to make decisions is determined by means of a free and competitive struggle
for the citizens' votes.

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?

1. How is political power actually distributed ill
America?
Some believe that political power in America is
monopolized by wealthy business leaders. by other
powerful elites. or by entrenched government bureaucrats. Others believe that political resources such as
money. prestige. expertise. organizational position.
and access to the mass media are so widely dispersed

in American society. and the governmental institutions and offtces in which power many be exercised so
numerous and varied. that no single group truly has
all or most political power. In this view. political power
in America is distributed more or less widely. No one.
however. argues that political resources are distributed equally in America.

Summary
2. What explains major political change?
The great shifts in the character of American government-its size. scope. institutional arrangements, and the direction of its policies-have
reflected complex and sometimes sudden changes in
elite or mass beliefs about what government is supposed to do. For instance, before Franklin Roosevelt's
New Deal, most leaders and citizens did not automatically look to the federal government to improve the
economy, and many doubted that Washington had

any legitimate role to play in managing economic
affairs. Today, however, leaders in both political parties assume that Washington must help reduce
unemployment, create jobs, and otherwise actively
manage the country's economy. The federal government now has poliCies on street crime, the environment. homeland security. and many other issues that
were not on the federal agenda a half-century (or, in
the case of homeland security. a mere half-decade)
ago.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. What value or values matter most in American
democracy?
The Framers of the Constitution had their vision of
American democracy and favored certain values, but
neither they nor the Constitution specify what values
matter most or how best to make trade-offs among or
between competing political ends.
2. Are

trade-oIls among political purposes
inevitable?
Yes. For insta nce, the government cannot spend more
on health care without spending less on something
else we may also desire--college loans, police patrols,
or toxic waste cleanups. Nor can it maximize one

value or purpose (say respecting the rights of persons
suspected or accused of terrorist acts) without minimizing others (like liberty and associated legal rights).
And. even if everyone agreed that the same one
value-say liberty-was supreme. we could not all
exercise it at the same time or to the fullest or just as
we pleased without all losing it in the bargain: if
everybody is at liberty to shout simultaneously,
nobody is at liberty to be heard individually. We often
cannot have more of some things we desire without
having less of other things we desire. too. That is as
true in politiCS and government, and as true for American democracy, as it is in other parts of life.

SUGGESTED READINGS
Banfield. Edward C. Politicallnj7uence. New York: Free Press. 1961.
A method of ana lyzi ng politics- in this case. in the city of
Ch icag()---{;omparable to th e approach adopted in this book.
Crick. Bernard. The American Science of Politics. London : Routledge
& Kegan Paul. 1959. A critica l review of the methods of studying government and politics.
Marx. Karl. and Friedrich Engels. "The Manifesto of the Communist Party." rn The Marx-Engels Reader, 2d ed .. edited by Robert
C. Tucker. New York: Norton. 1978. 469- 500. The classic
statement of the Marxist view of history and politics. Should
be read in con junction with Engels. "Socialism: Utopian and
Scientific." in the sa me collection. 683- 717.
Mills. C. Wright. The Power Elite. New York: Oxford University
Press. 1956. An argument that self-serving elites dominate
American politics.

Schumpeter. Joseph A. Capitalism. Socialism, and Democracy. 3d ed.
New York: Harper Torchbooks. 1950. chs. 20- 23. A lucid
statement of the theory of representative democracy a nd how
it differs from partiCipatory democracy.
Truman . David B. The Governmental Process. 2d ed. New York:
Knopf. 1971. A pluralist interpretation of American politics.
Weber, Max. From Max Weber: Essays in SOciology. Translated and
edited by H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills. London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul. 1948. ch. 8. A theory of bureaucracy and its
power.

15

CHAPTER

2

The Constitution

The Problem of Liberty
The Colonial Mind • The Real
Revolution • Weaknesses of the
Confederation

The Constitutional Convention
The Lessons of Experience •
The Framers

The Challenge
The Virginia Plan • The New Jersey
Plan • The Compromise

The Constitution and Democracy
Key Principles •
Human Nature

Government and

The Constitution and Liberty
The Antifederalist View • Need for
a Bill of Rights • The Constitution
and Slavery

The Motives of the Framers
Economic Interests at the Convention •
Economic Interests and Ratification •
The Constitution and Equality

Constitutional Reform: Modern Views
Reducing the Separation of Powers •
Making the System Less Democratic •
Who Is Right?

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1. What is t he d ifference between a
democracy and a republic?
2. What branch of government has the
greatest power?

1.
2.

Does the Constitution tell us what
goa ls t he government should serve ?
W hose freedom does the Constitut ion protect ?

I

f you had been alive in 1787. you might have wondered what was going
on in Philadelphia. A small group of men (a ll white) were meeting to discuss how the country should be run. They were not chosen by popular election and they were meetin g in secret. There was no press coverage. A few
famous men. such as Patrick Henry of Virginia. had refused to be a delegate.
and one state, Rhode Island . sent no delegates at all.
And just what were these men going to do? They were supposed to fix the
defects in the Articles of Confederation. the arrangement under which the former American colonies had waged war against England. But when the convention was over. no defects in the Articles had been fixed; instead, a wholly
new constitution had been proposed. And it was a constitution that in the eyes
of some people gave too much power to a new nationa l government.
The goa l of the American Revolution was liberty. It was not the fir st revolution with that object; it may not have been the last; but it was perhaps the
clearest case of a people altering the political order violently. simply in order
to protect their liberties. Subsequent revolutions had more complicated . or
utterly different, objectives. The French Revolution in 1 789 sought not only
liberty. but "equality and fraternity." The Russian Revolution (1917) and the
Chinese Revolution (culminating in 1949) chiefly sought equality and were
little concerned with liberty as we understand it.

*

The Problem of Liberty

What the American colonists sou ght to protect when they signed the Declaration of Independence in 1776 were the traditional liberties to which
they thought they were entitled as British subj ects. These liberties included
the right to bring their legal cases before tru ly independent judges rather
than ones subordinate to the king; to be free of the burden of having British
troops quartered in their homes; to engage in trade without burdensome
restrictions; and , of course. to pay no taxes voted by a British Pa rliament in
which they had no direct representation . During the ten years or more of
agitation a nd argument leading up to the War of Independence. most
. colonists believed that their liberties could be protected while they remained
a part of the British Empire.
Slowly but surely opinion shifted. By the time war broke out in 1 775. a
large number of colonists (though perhaps not a majority) had reached the
conclu sion that the coloni es would have to become independent of Great

17

18

Chapter 2

,."

~(}

· sc ~

The Constitution

Or, Tholl1as's Boiton Journal.
'- Do THOU G"" LillERTI' "'(I'i" 0" :;o , ,,_,,n..d. mal<, o"Li " , in T "y PO([, /lion h'PPY_O
. r , our Deaths gloriou s in T HT jufi Defence.'

VOL.IV.)

THURSDAY, JULY 7, ' 77 4 '

(NUMB.li9·

'· .~~~~~~F~-~~·

(

Even before the Revolu tionary Wa/; many felt that some form of union would be necessilry if
the rebellious colonies were to survive. In 1774, the Massachusetts Spy portrayed the coLonies
as segments of Il snllke that must "Join or Die."

Brita in if their liberties were to be assured. The
colonists had many reasons for regarding independence as the only solution, but one is especially important: they no longer had confidence in the English
constitution. This constitution was not a single written document but rather a collection of laws, charters, and traditional understandings that procla imed
the liberties of British subjects, Yet these liberties, in
the eyes of the colonists, were regularly violated
despite their constitutional protection, Clea rly, then,
the English constitution was an inadequate check on
the abuses of political power. The revolutionary leaders sought an expla nation of the insufficiency of the
constitution and found it in human nature,

The Colonial Mind
'1\ lust for domination is more or less natural to aLi
parties," one colonist wrote,l Men will seek power,
many colon ists believed, because they are ambitious,
greedy, and eas ily cor rupted, John Adams denounced
the "luxury, effemina cy, and venality" of English politics; Patrick Henry spoke scathingly of the "corrupt
House of Commons "; and Alexander Hamil ton
described England as "an old, wrinkled, withered,
worn-out hag,"2 This was in part flamboyant rhetoric
designed to whip up enthusiasm for the co nflict, but it
was also deeply revealing of the colonial mind. Their
belief that English politicians- a nd by implication,
most politicians- tended to be corrupt was the
colonists' explanation of why the English constit ution

was not a n adequate guarantee of the liberty of the
citizens. Th is opinion was to persist and, as we shall
see, profoundly affect the way the Americans went
about designing their own governments,
The liberties the colonists fought to protect were,
they thought, widely understood, They were based
not on the generosity of the king or the language of
statutes but on a "higher law" embodying "natural
rights" that were ordained by God, discoverable in
nature and history, and essential to human progress,
These rights, John Dickinson wrote, "are born with us;
exist with us; and cannot be taken away from us by
any human power. "3 There was genera l agreement
that the essential rights included life, liberty, and property long before Thomas Je fferson wrote them into
the Decl aration of Independence, Gefferson changed
"property" to "the pursuit of happiness," but almost
everybody else went on tallcing about property,)
This emph asis on property did not mean that the
American Revolution was thought up by the rich and
wellborn to protect their interests or that there was a
struggle between property owners and the propertyless. In late-eighteenth-century America most peopl e
(except the black slaves) had property of some kind.
The overwhelming majority of citizens were selfemployed- as farmers or artisans- and rather few
people benefited financially by gaining independence
from England. Taxes were higher during and after the
war than before, trade was disrupted by the conOict,
and debts mounted perilously as various expedients

The Problem oj Liberty

The American colonists' desire to assert their liberties led in tirne to a deep hostility to British
govemment, as when these New Yorkers toppled a statue of Ki ng George lll, lI1elted it down, and
used the metal to make bullets.

were invented to pay for the struggle. There were, of
course, war profiteers and those who tried to manipulate the currency to their own advantage, but most
Americans at the time of the war saw the conf1ict
clearly in terms of politica l rather than economic
issues. It was a war of ideo logy.
Everyone recognizes th e glow ing la nguage with
which Jefferso n set out the case for indepen dence in
the second paragraph of the Declaration:
We hold these tru ths to be self-evident, that all
men are created eq ual. that they are endowed
by their Creator w ith certa in un alienable
Rights, that among these are Life, Li berty, and
the pursu it of Happiness.-That to secure
these rights , Governments are instituted
among Men, deriving their just powers from
the consent of the governed- that whenever
a ny Form of Government becomes destructive
of these ends, it is the Right of the People to
alter or to abolish it, and to institute new Government, having its foundation on suc h principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as
to them shall seem most likely to effect their
Safety and Happiness.

What almost no one recalls, but what are a n
essential part of the Declaration, are the next
twenty-seven paragraphs, in wh ich Jefferso n listed ,
item by item, the speci fI c complaints the colon ists
h ad against George III a nd his mini sters. None of
these items spoke of sociClI or economic co nditions
in the colonies; all spoke instead of specific violations of poli tica l liberties. The Declaration was in
essen ce a lawye r's brief prefaced by a stirring
philosophica l claim that the rights being violated
were unalienable- that is, based on nature and
Providence, and not on the whi ms or preferences of
people. Jefferson, in his ori ginal draft, added a
twenty-eig hth complaint- that the king had allowed
the slave trade to continue and was inciting slaves to
revolt against their masters. Congress, faced with so
co ntradictory a charge, decided to include a muted
reference to slave insurrections and omit all reference
to the slave trade.

unalienable
or God .

A human right based on nature

19

20

Chapter 2

Th e Constitution

North America in 1787

PACIFIC

LOUISIANA

OCEAN

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Proclamation Line of 1763
Origi nal thirteen colonies

El United States
D Spanish

-

English
Fren ch

D

Russian

GRANADA

The Real Revolution
The Revolution was more tha n the War of Independence. It began before the war. co ntinued after it, and
involved more than driving out the British army by
force of arms. The real Revolution, as John Adams
afterward explained in a letter to a frien d, was the
"radical change in the principles. opinions. sentiments, and affections of the people."4 This radical
change had to do with a new vision of what co uld
make political authority legitimate and personal liberties secure. Government by roya l prerogative was
rejected; instead legitimate govern ment wo uld
require the consent of the governed. Political power

could not be exercised on the basis of tradition but
only as a result of a direct gra nt of power contained
in a written constitution. Human liberty existed
before government was orga nized. and government
must respect that liberty. The legislative bra nch of
government. in which the people were directly represented. should be superior to the executive bra nch.
These were indeed revolutionary ideas. No government at the time had been organized on the basis
of these principles. And to the co lonists such notions
were not empty words but rules to be put into immediate practice. In 1776 eight states adopted written
constitutions. Within a few years every form er
co lony had adopted one except Connecticut a nd

21

The Problem of Liberty
Rhode Island, two states that continued to rely on
their colonial charters. Most state constitutions had
detailed bills of rights defining personal liberties, and
most placed the hlghest political power in the hands
of elected representatives.
Written constitutions, representatives, and bil ls of
rights are so familiar to us now that we forget how
bold and unprecedented those innovations were in
1776. Indeed, many Americans did not think they
would succeed: such arrangements would be either
so strong that they would threaten liberty or so weak
that they would permit chaos.
The eleven years that elapsed between the Declaration of Independence and the signing of the Constitution in 1787 were years of turmoil, uncertainty,
and fear. George Washington had to wage a bitter,
protracted war without anything resembling a
strong national government to support him. The
supply and financing of his army were based on a
series of hasty improvisations, most bad ly administered and few adequately supported by the fiercely
independent states. When peace came, many parts
of the nation were a shambles. At least a quarter of
New York City was in ruins, and many other communities were nearly devastated. Though the British
lost the war, they still were powerfu l on the North
American continent, with an army avai lable in
Canada (where many Americans loyal to Britain had
fled) and a large navy at sea. Spain claimed the
Mississippi River valley and occupied what are now
Florida and California. Men who had left their
farms to fight came back to discover themselves in
debt with no money and heavy taxes. The paper
money printed to finance the war was now virtually
worthless.

weaknesses of the Confederation
The thirteen states had formed only a faint semblance
of a national government with which to bring order
to the nation. The Articles of Confed e ration,
which went into effect in 1781, created little more
than a "league of friendshlp " that could not levy taxes
or regulate commerce. Each state retained its sovereignty and independence, each state (regardless of
size) had one vote in Congress, nine (of thirteen) votes
were required to pass any measure, and the delegates
who cast these votes were picked and paid for by the
state legislatures. Congress did have the power to
make peace, and thus it was able to ratify the treaty
with England in 1783. It could coin money, but there

R,..",
...

A

A_n

,

,..

~

1'lilY"

.

~'~h"'_

.....-__ .'Io-L-'", ~ 4.- t-. ~~ .. ..... H.. 1,_,,) ., .,..,-;-/•• ,-- 1_. >'-1-'"

I

R:~~"T "

·C

s'

E

L

0'

.

OF

CONFEDERATION

AN"

PERPETUAL UNldN"

I•• f ~
B E TW E E N' ,.., -<XH:ri)-N+E-S 0'

,

N f: W ~ n AMP S H I R' E. •
Pot A S SA C flU S E TTS·8A Y,

RHODE . ISLAND.
CONNECTICUT.
NEW.YORK.

N E W.J E RSJ( Y.

SO UT H- <;A ROLl NAt
GEORGIA.

1'EN NSTL V AN I .".

THE

A.T. 1.

"

OF

.... 0

"Name of this Cookdency IhaU be _

AM.ER;'C:~E UNITEDfSTtTB~

AAT. 1I.

1'bc iaid~ tWc&-.~..

_"'loedivJdal~~""";""~'" hueby fe.
~Uy enttt into a firm League of Friendlbip with each
other, few their c:ommoo [)re(eace• . the Security of tbcit

,

I.i-.[!od thcU- mutu>l ODd gcoeRI W"f~ b;ndin,
.. t.i. Celt' to :affift~ ariun all Force offered 10 or attacb made upoa them oran,oftb:m,ron
rAccount ollleligiooJ Soven:iply~ Trade. o(~ aD)' otbc:t
/P~ !,hatevu] ~/ ~

MT.Ul.

. ;1

"

if

Eadt~;'di1D"""cojoy"""

-~_ 0. ....... it m.,AiaIa
rcfenoa; to itfelf the fole and ad.6ft:.R.cgulation
i.a all mltters that
a.ll DOt iutuferc .ith the Artiel" of this Coofedetatioa.

W'ita ,...... L ••,
~

ami Gon:nunent of ita internal police.
ART. IV .

t t

No~, .~

r'

} ~1 to

ru:.;.."

witboutthe CottlD)' Em-

Sta~dk:bled. 0uJJ fend
or ~~, .EfD~1....(r

. rent of the United

4;

CoM=-.!,,","'_"-~

c.n

.....&

OWl any

.

:~. -;~Y~

_

u,l.

...

~

the United Stata. or ...
l$) J
C '.... ~
of aft1 PreCent. Emolument. 0fIice. or Tide IJf
kiDd
wIwncr..!...~~e ~ ~. Y','
'0
8'IILia,
~ auy ....... Pn~ OI'. OXUC; nor DW) the UDited ScaCCl
&mblal, o. .nL~gnnt""T;"'oCNobillty.

III,

A.T, V. No two or more Coioniet Ihalleoter iDloan),
Treaty. Confederation or AUiance wllfltner between
them.. without the p-eig. • flw Coofeut ...........

-.

The Articles of Confederation had made it plain that the
United States was not to have a true national government
but was to lie governed by a compact among sovereign and
independent states,

was precious little to coin; it could appoint the key
army officers, but the army was small and dependent
for support on independent state militias; it was
allowed to run the post office, then, as now, a thankless task that nobody else wanted. John Hancock,
who in 1785 was elected to the meaningless office of
"president" under the Articles, never showed up to
take the job. Several states claimed the unsettled lands
in the West, and they occasionally pressed those
claims with guns. Pennsylvania and Virginia went to

A weak constitution that governed America during the Revolutionary Wa r.

Articles of Confede ration

22

Chapter 2

The Constitution

The Constitutional
Convention
The delegates assembled at Philadelphia at the Constit utional Conven tion, for what was advertised
(and authorized by Congress) as a meeting to revise
the Articles: they adjourned four months later having written a wholly new constitution. When they
met. they were keenly aware of the problems of the
confederacy but far from agreeing as to what should
be done about those problems. The protection of life.
liberty. and property was their objective in 1787 as it
had been in 1776. but they had no accepted political
theory that would teU them what kind of national
government, if any. would serve that goal.

John Hancock was proud to have signed the Declaration oj
Independence but thought so little oj the presidency under the
Articles oj Confederation that he never bothered to accept the job.

war near Pittsburgh. and Vermont threatened to
become part of Canada. There was no national judicial system to settle these or other claims among the
states. To amend the Articles of Confederation. all
thirteen states had to agree.
Many of the leaders of the Revolution. such as
George Washington and Alexander Hamilton.
believed that a stronger national government was
essential. They lamented the disruption of commerce
and travel caused by the quarrelsome states and
deeply feared the possibility of foreign military intervention. with England or France playing one state off
against another. A small group of men. conferring
at Washington's home at Mount Vernon in 1785.
decided to call a meeting to discuss trade regulation.
That meeting. held at Annapolis. Maryland. in September 1786. was not well attended (no delegates
arrived from New England). and so another meeting.
this one in Philadelphia. was called for the following
spring- in May 178 7- to consider ways of remedying the defects of the Confederation.

Constitutional Convention

Meeting in
Philadelphia in 1787 that produced a new
constitution .

The Lessons of Experience
They had read ancient and modern political history.
only to learn that nothing seemed to work. James
Madison spent a good part of 1786 studying books
sent to him by Thomas Jefferson. then in Paris. in
hopes of finding some model for a workable American republic. He took carefu l notes on various confederacies in ancient Greece and on the more modern
confederacy of the United Netherlands. He reviewed
the history of Switzerland and Poland and the ups
and downs of the Roman republic. He concluded that
there was no model; as he later put it in one of the
& deralist papers. history consists only of beacon
lights "which give warning of the course to be
shunned. without pointing out that which ough t to
be pursued." s The problem seemed to be that confederacies were too weak to govern and tended to
collapse [rom internal dissension. while all stronger
forms of government were so powerful as to trample
the liberties of the citizens.
• State Constitutions Madison and the others did
not need to consult h istory. or even the defects of
the Articles of Confederation. for illustrations of the
problem. These could be found in the government of
the American states at the time. Pennsylvania and
Massachusetts exemplified two aspects of the problem. The Pennsy lvan ia constitution. adopted in
1776. created the most radica lly democratic of the
new state regimes. All power was given to a onehouse (unicameral) legislature. th e Assembly. the
members of which were elected annua lly for one-

The Constitutional Convention
year terms. No legislator could serve more than four
years. There was no governor or president, only an
Executive Council that had few powers. Thomas
Paine, whose pamphlets had helped precipitate the
break with England, thought the Pennsylvania con stitution was the best in America, and in France
philosophers hailed it as the very embodiment of the
principle of rule by the people. Though popular in
France, it was a good deal less popular in Philadelphia. The Assembly disfranchised the Quakers,
persecuted conscientious objectors to the war,
ignored the requirement of trial by juries, and
manipulated the judiciary. 6 To Madison and his
friends the Pennsylvania constitution demonstrated
how a government, though democratic, could be
tyrannical as a result of concentrating all powers
into one set of hands.
The Massachusetts constitution, adopted in
1780, was a good deal less democratic. There was
a clear separation of powers among the various
branches of government, the directly elected governor cou ld veto acts of the legislature, and judges
served for life. Both voters and elected officials had to
be property owners; the governor, in fact, had to own
at least £1,000 worth of property. The prinCipal
officeholders had to swear that they were Christians.
• Shays's Rebellion But if the government of
Pennsylvania was thought to be too strong, that of
Massachusetts seemed too weak, despite its "conservative" features. In January 1787 a group of exRevolutionary War soldiers and officers, plagued by
debts and high taxes and fearful of losing their property to creditors and tax collectors, forcibly prevented the courts in western Massachusetts from sitting. This became known as Shays's Rebellion,
after one of the officers, Daniel Shays. The governor
of Massachusetts asked the Continental Congress to
send troops to suppress the rebellion, but it could not
raise the money or the manpower. Then he turned to
h is own state militia, but discovered he did not have
one. In desperation private funds were collected
to hire a volunteer army, which marched on
Springfield and, with the firing of a few shots, dispersed the rebels, who fled into neighboring states.
Shays's Rebellion, occurring between the aborted
Annapolis and the coming Philadelphia conventions,
had a powerful effect on opinion. Delegates who
might have been reluctant to attend the Philadelphia

23

The presiding officer at the Constitutional Convention was George
Washington (1732-1799). He participated just once in the
debates, but the effect of his presence was great. He was a
national military hero, and it was generally expected that he
would be the nation's first president.

meeting, especially those from New England, were
galvanized by the fear that state governments were
about to collapse from internal dissension. George
Washington wrote a friend despairingly: "For God's
sake, if they [the rebels] have real grievances, redress
them; if they have not, employ the force of government against them at once." 7 Thomas Jefferson, living in Paris, took a more detached view: 'i\. little
rebellion now and then is a good thing," he wrote.
"The tree of liberty must be refreshed from time to
time with the blood of patriots and tyrants. "8
Though Jefferson's detachment might be explained
by the fact that he was in Paris and not in Springfield,
there were others, like Governor George Clinton of
New York, who shared the view that no strong central government was required. (Whether Clinton
would have agreed about the virtues of spilled blood,
especially his, is another matter.)

Shays's Rebellion

A 1787 rebellion in which
eX-Revolutionary War sold iers attempted to
prevent foreclosures of farms as a result of
high interest rates and taxes.

24

Chapter 2

The Constitution

Shays 's Rebellion in western Massachusetts in
1786- 1787 stirred deep fears of anarchy in America.
The ruckus was put down by a hastily assemlJIed militia,
and the rebels were eventually pardoned.

The Framers
The Philadelphia convention attracted fifty-five delegates, only about thirty of whom participated regularly in the proceedings. One state, Rhode Island,
refused to send anyone. The convention met during a
miserably hot Philadelphia summer, with the delegates pledged to keep their deliberations secret. The
talkative and party-loving Benjamin Franklin was
often accompanied by other delegates to make sure
that neither wine nor his delight in telling stories
would lead him to divulge delicate secrets.
Those who attended were for the most part young
(Hamilton was thirty; Madison thirty-six) but experienced. Eight delegates had signed the Declaration of
Independence, seven had been governors, thirty-four
were lawyers and reasonably well-to-do, a few were
wealthy. They were not "intellectuals," but men of
practical affairs. Thirty-nine had served in the ineffectual Congress of the Confederation; a third were
veterans of the Continental Army.
Some names made famous by the Revolution were
conspicuously absent. Thomas Jefferson and John
Adams were serving as ministers abroad; Samuel
Adams was ill; Patrick Henry was chosen to attend
but refused, commenting that he "smelled a rat in
Philadelphia, tending toward monarchy. "

The convention produced not a revision of the
Articles of Confederation, as it had been authorized
to do, but instead a wholly new written constitution
creating a true national government unlike any that
had existed before. That document is today the
world 's oldest written national constitution. Those
who wrote it were neither saints nor schemers, and
the deliberations were not always lofty or philosophical- much hard bargaining, not a little confusion,
and the accidents of personality and time helped
shape the final product. The delegates were split on
many issues- what powers should be given to a
centra l government, how the states should be represented, what was to be done about slavery, the role of
the people-each of which was resolved by a compromise. The speeches of the delegates (known to us
from the detailed notes kept by Madison) did not
explicitly draw on political philosophy or quote from
the writings of philosophers. Everybody present was
quite familiar with the trad itiona l arguments and, on
the whole, well read in history. But though the leading political philosophers were only rarely mentioned, the debate was profoundly influenced by
philosophical beliefs, some formed by the revolutionary experience and others by the eleven-year attempt
at self-government.
From the debates leading up to the Revolution, the
delegates had drawn a commitment to liberty, which,
despite the abuses sometimes committed in its name,
they continued to share. Their defense of liberty as a
natural right was derived from the writings of the
English philosopher John Locke and based on his
view that such rights are discoverable by reason. In a
"state of nature," Locke argued, all men cherish and
seek to protect their life, liberty, and property. But in
a state of nature- that is, a society without a government- the strong can use their liberty to deprive
the weak of theirs. The instinct for self-preservation
leads people to want a government that will prevent this exploitation. But if the government is not
itself to deprive its subjects of their liberty, it must be
limited. The chief limitation on it, he said, should
derive from the fact that it is created , and governs, by
the consent of the governed. People will not agree to
be ruled by a government that threatens their liberty;
therefore the government to which they freely
choose to submit themselves will be a limited government designed to protect liberty.
The Pennsylvania experience as well as the history of British government led the Framers to doubt

The Challenge
whether popular co nsent alone would be a sufficient
guarantor of liberty. A popular government may
prove too weak (as in Massachusetts) to prevent one
faction from abusing another, or a popular majority
ca n be tyrannical (as in Pennsy lvania). In fa ct the
tyranny of the majority can be an even graver threat
than rule by the few. In the former case there may be
no defenses for the individual- one lone person cannot count on the succor of public opinion or the possibility of popular revolt.
The problem. then, was a delicate one: how to
devise a government strong enough to preserve order
but not so strong that it would threaten liberty. The
answer. th e delegates believed, was not "democracy"
as it was then understood. To many conservatives in
the late eighteenth ce ntury, democracy meant mob
rul e- it mea nt. in short, Shays's Rebellion (or, if
they had been candid about it, the Boston Tea Party) .
On the other hand , aristocrac!J- the rule of the fewwas no solution, since the few were likely to be selfseeking. Madison, writing later in the Federalist
papers , put the problem this way:
If men were angels. no government would be
necessary. If angels were to govern men. neither
external nor internal controls on government
would be necessary. In framing a government
which is to be admin istered by men over men,
the great difficulty lies in this: you must first
enable the government to control the governed;
and in the next place oblige it to control itself.9

Striking this balance could not be done, Madison
believed, simply by writing a constitution that set
limits on what government could do. The example of
British rule over the colonies proved that laws and
customs were inadeq uate checks on political power.
As he expressed it, "A mere demarcation on parchment of the constitutional limits [of government] is
not a sufficient guard against those encroachments
which lead to a tyrannical co ncentration of all the
powers of government in the same hands."JO

The Challenge
The resolution of political issues. great and small,
often depends crucially on how the central question
is phrased. The delegates came to Philadelphi a in
general agreement that there were defects in the
Articles of Confederation that ought to be remedied.

Had they, after convening, decided to make their
business that of listing these defects and debating
alternative remedies for them , the document that
emerged would in all likelihood have been very different from what in fact was adopted. But immedi ately after the convention had organized itself and
chosen Washington to be its presiding officer, the Virginia delegation, led by Governor Edmund Ra ndolph
but relying heavily on the draftsmanship of James
Madison, presented to the convention a comprehensive plan for a wholly new national government. The
plan quickly became the major item of business of
the meeting; it, and li ttle else, was debated for the
next two weeks.

The Virginia Plan
When the convention decided to make the Virginia
Plan its agenda . it had fundamenta lly altered the
nature of its task. The business at hand was not to be
the Articles and their defects, but rather how one
should go about designing a true national government. The Virginia Plan ca lled for a strong national
union organized into three governmenta l branches- the legislative, executive, and judicial. The legislature was to be composed of two houses. the fir st
elected directly by the people and the second chosen
by the first house from among the people nominated
by state legislatures. The executive was to be chosen
by the national legislature, as were members of a
national judiciary. The executive and some members
of the judiciary were to constitute a "coun cil of revision" that could veto acts of the legislature: that veto.
in turn, could be overridden by the legislature. There
were other interesting details. but the key features of
the Virginia Plan were two: (1) a national legislature
would have supreme powers on all matters on which
the separate states were not competent to act, as well
as the power to veto a ny and all state laws, and (2) at
least one house of the leg islature wou ld be elected
directly by the people.

The New Jersey Plan
As the debate went on, the representatives of New
Jersey and other small states beca me in creaSingly
worried that the convention was going to write a

Proposal to create a strong
national government.

Virginia Plan

25

26

Chapter 2

The Constitution

constitution in which the states would be represented in both houses of Congress on the basis of population. If this happened, the small er states feared
they would always be outvoted by the larger ones,
and so, with William Paterson of New Jersey as their
spokesman, they introduced a new plan. The New
Jer sey P la n proposed to amend, not replace. the old
Articles of Confederation. It enh a nced the power of
the national government (though not as much as the
Virginia Plan), but it did so in a way that left the
states' representation in Congress unchanged from
th e Articles- each state would have one vote. Thus
not only would the interests of the small states be
protected, but Congress itself would remain to a substantial degree the creature of state governments.
If the New Jersey reso lutions had been presented
first and taken up as the major item of business, it
is quite possible that they would have become the
fra mework for the document that fin ally emerged.
But they were not. Offered after the convention had
been discussing the Virginia Plan for two weeks, the
resolutions encountered a reception very different
from what they would have received if introduced
earlier. The debate had the delegates already thinking in terms of a nationa l government that was more
independent of the states, and thus it had accustomed them to proposals that, und er other circumstances, might have seemed quite radical. On June
19 the first decisive vote of the conven tion was
taken: seven states preferred the Virgini a P lan, three
states the New Jersey P lan, and one state was sp lit.
With the tide running in favor of a strong national government, the supporters of the small states had
to shift their strategy. They now began to focus their
efforts on ensuring that the small states could not be
outvoted by the larger ones in Co ngress. One way
was to have the members of the lower house elected
by the state legislatures rather than the people, with
each state getting the same number of seats rather
than seats proportiona l to its population.
The debate was long and feelings ran high, so
much so that Benjamin Franklin, at eighty-one the
oldest delegate present, suggested th at each day's
Proposa l to create a weak
nationa l government.
Great Compromise Plan to have a popularly
elected House based on state population and a
state-selected Senate, with two members for
each state.
New Jersey Plan

Independence Hall in Philadelphia, where tile Dec/oration oj
Independence and the Constitution were signed.

meeting begin with a prayer. It turned out that the
convention cou ld not even agree on this: Hamilton is
supposed to have obj ected that the convention did
not need "foreign aid," and others painted out that
the group had no funds with wh ich to hire a minister. And so the argument continued.

The Compromise
Finally, a committee was appointed to meet during
the Fourth of July holidays to work out a compromise,
and the convention adjourned to awa it its report. Little is known of what went on in that committee's session, though some were later to say that Frankli n
played a key role in hammerin g out the plan tha t
[maily emerged. That compromise, the most important reached at the convention, and later called the
Great Compromise (or sometimes th e Co nnecticut
Compromise), was submitted to the fu ll convention
on July 5 and debated for another week and a ha lf.

The COl1stitutiOI1 al1d Democracy
The debate might have gone on even longer. but suddenly the hot weather moderated, and Monday. July
16, dawned cool and fresh after a month or ITlisery.
On that day the plan was adopted: five states were in
favor, four were opposed, and two did not vote.* Thus,
by the narrowest of margins , the structure of the
national legislature was set as rollows:
• A House or Representatives consisting initially of
sixty-five members apportioned among the states
roughly on the basis or population and elected by
the peopl e
• A Senate co nsisting or two senators from each
state to be chosen by the state legislatures
The Great Compromise reconciled the interests of
small a nd la rge states by allowing the former to predominate in the Senate a nd the latter in the House.
This reco nciliation was necessary to ensure that
there wo uld be support ror a strong national government from small as well as large states. It represented major co ncessions on the part of several groups.
Madison, for one, was deeply opposed to the idea of
having the states equally represented in the Senate.
He saw in that a way ror the states to hamstrin g the
national government a nd much preferred so me
meas ure or proportional representa tion in both
houses. Delegates from other states worried that representation on the basis of population in the House
or Representatives would enable the large states to
dominate legislative affairs. Although the margin by
which the compromise was accepted was razor-thin.
it held firm. In time most of the delegates from the
dissenting states accepted it.
Arter the Great Co mpromise ma ny more issues
had to be resolved, but by now a spirit of accommodation had developed. When one delegate proposed
having Co ngress choose the president. another.
James Wilso n, proposed that he be elected directly by
the people. When neither side of that argument prevailed. a committee invented a plan ror an "electoral
college" that wo uld choose the president. When
some delegates wanted the president chosen ror a life
term, others proposed a seven-year term, and still

*Th e states in favor were Connecticut, Delaw are, Maryland,
New Jersey, and North Carolina. Those opposed were Georgia, Pennsylva nia, South Carolina, and Virg in ia. Massachusetts was split down the middle; the New York delegates
had left the convention. New Hampshire and Rhode Island
were absent.

others wanted the term limi ted to three years without eligibility for reelection. The convention settled
on a four-year term with no bar to reelection. Some
states wanted the Supreme Court picked by the Senate; others wanted it chosen by the president. They
fmally agreed to let the justices be nominated by the
president a nd then confirmed by the Senate.
Finally, on July 26, the proposals that were already
accepted. together with a bundle of unresolved issues.
were handed over to the Committee of Deta il. co nsisting of five delegates. This committee included Mad ison a nd Gouverneur Morris, who was to be the chier
draftsman of the document that finally emerged. The
committee hardly contented itselr with mere "details,"
however. It inserted some new proposals and made
changes in old ones. drawing for inspiration on existing state constitutions and the members' beliefs as to
what the other delegates might accept. On August 6
the report- the l'irst complete draft or the Constitution-was submitted to the convention. There it was
debated, item by item, revised, amended. and finally,
on September 1 7, approved by aU twelve states in
attendance. (Not all delegates approved , however:
three. including Edmund Randolph. who first submitted the Virginia Plan, refused to sign.)

*

The Constitution and
Democracy
A debate continues to rage over whether the Constitution crea ted, or was even intended to create, a
democratic government. The answer is complex. The
Framers did not intend to create a "pure democracy"-one in which the people rule directly. For one
thin g th e size or the coun try and the distances
between settlements would have made that physically imposs ible. But more important the Fra mers worried that a government in which all citizens directly
participate, as in the New England town meeting,
wou ld be a government exceSS ively subject to temporary popular passions and one in which minority
rights would be insecure. They intended instead to
create a republic, by wh ich they mea nt a government in which a system or representation operates.
In designing that system the Framers chose, not

republic A government in which elected rep resentatives make the decisions.

27

28

Chapter 2

Th e Constitution

without argument. to have the members of th e
House of Representatives elected directly by the people. Some delegates did not want to go even that far.
Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts. who refused to sign
the Constitution, argued that though "the people do
not want [that is, lack] virtue," th ey are often the
"dupes of pretended patriots. " Roger Sherman of
Connecticut agreed. But George Mason of Virginia
and James Wilson of Pennsylvania carried the day
when they argued that "no government could lon g
subsist without the confidence of the people," and
this required "drawing the most numerous branch
of the legislature directly from the people." Popular
elections for the House were approved: six states were
in favor, two opposed.
But though popul a r rule was to be one element of
th e new government. it was not to be the only one.
State legislatures, not the people, would choose th e
senators: electo rs, not the people directly, would
choose the president. As we have seen, without these
arrangements, there would have been no Constitu tion at all, for the small states adamantly opposed
any proposa l that would have given undue power to
the large ones. And direct popular election of the
president would clearly have made the populous
states the dominant ones. In short the Framers
wished to observe the principle of majority rule. but
they felt that, on the most important questions, two
kinds of majorities were essential-a majority of the
voters and a majority of the states.
The power of the Supreme Court to declare an act
of Congress uncon stitutional-judicial review- is
also a way of limitin g the power of popular majorities. It is not clear whether the Fra mers intended that
there be judicia l rev iew, but there is little doubt that
in the Fra mers' minds the fundamental law, the Constitution, had to be safeguarded against popular
passions. They made the process for amendin g the
Constitution easier than it had been under the Articles but sti ll relatively difficult.
An amendment ca n be proposed either by a twothirds vote of both houses of Congress or by a national convention called by Congress at the requ est of

judicial review

The power of the courts to
declare laws unconstitutional.
federalism Government authority shared by
national and state governments.

two-th irds of the states.* Once proposed , an amendment must be ratified by three-fourths of the states,
either through their legislatures or through special
ratifying conventions in each state. Twenty-seven
a mendm ents have survived th is process. a ll of them
proposed by Congress a nd all but one (the Twentyfirst Amendment) ratified by state legislatures rather
than state conventions.
In short the answer to the question of whether the
Constitution brought into being a democratic government is yes, if by democracy one mea ns a system
of representative government based on popular consent. The degree of that consent has changed since
1787. and the institutions embodying that consent
ca n take different form s. One form, rejected in 178 7,
gives a ll politica l authority to one set of representatives, directly elected by the people. (That is the case,
for exa mple. in most parliamentary regimes, such as
Great Britain. a nd in some city governments in the
United States.) The other form of democracy is one
in which different sets of officials, chosen directly or
indirectly by different groups of people, share politca l
power. (That is the case with the United States and a
few other nations where the separati on of powers is
intended to operate.)

Key Principles
The American version of representative democracy
was based on two major principles, the separation of
powers and federalism. In America politica l power was
to be shared by three separate bra nches of government: in pa rliamentary democracies that power was
co ncentrated in a Sin gle. supreme legislature. In
America political authority was divided between a
nationa l government and several state governmentsfederalism- whereas in most European systems
authority was centralized in the national government.
Neither of these principles was especially controversial
at Philadelphia. The delegates bega n their work in
broad agreement that separated powers and some
measure of federa lism were necessary, and both the

*There have been many attempts to get a new constitutional convention. In the 1960s thirty-three states, one
short of the req uired number, requested a convention to
consider the reapportionment of state leg islatures . In the
1980s efforts were made to cal l a convention to consider
amendments to ban abortions and to require a balanced
federal budget.

The Constitution and Democracy

HOW THINGS WORK

Checks and Balances
The Constitution creates a system of separate institut ions that share powers. Because the three branches
of government share powers, each can (partially)
check the powers of the others. Th is is the system of
checks and balances. The major checks possessed by
each branch are listed below.
Congress
1. Can check the president in these ways:
a. By refusing to pass a bill the president wants
b. By passing a law over the president's veto
c. By using the impeachment powers to remove
the president from office
d. By refusing to approve a presidential appointment (Senate only)
e. By refusing to ratify a treaty the president has
signed (Senate only)
2. Can check the federal courts in these ways:
a. By changing the number and jurisdiction of
the lower courts
b. By using the impeachment powers to remove a
judge from office
c. By refusing to approve a person nominated to
be a judge (Senate only)

Virginia and New Jersey plans contained a version of
each. How much federalism should be written into the
Constitution was quite contToversial. however.
Under these two principles, governmental powers
in this countTY can be divided into three categories.
The powers that are given to the national government
exclusively are the delegated or enumerated powers. They include the authority to print money,
declare war, make treaties, conduct roreign afrairs,
and regulate commerce among the states and with
roreign nations. Those that are given exclusively to
the states are the reser ved powers and include the
power to issue licenses and to regulate commerce
wholly within a state. Those that are shared by both
the nationa l and the state governments are called
conc ur ren t powe r s and include collecting taxes,
building roads, borrowing money, and having courts.

The President
1. Can check Congress by vetoing a bill it has passed
2. Can check the federal courts by nominating
judges
The Courts
1. Can check Congress by declaring a law unconstitutional
2. Can check the president by declaring actions by
him or his subordinates to be unconstitutional or
not authorized by law
In addition to these checks specifically provided
for in the Constitution, each branch has informal
ways of checking the others. For example, the president can try to withhold information from Congress
(on the grounds of "executive privilege"), and Congress can try to get information by mounting an
investigation .
The exact mean ing of the various checks is
explained in Chapter 13 on Congress, Chapter 14 on
the presidency, and Chapter 16 on the courts.

Government and Human Nature
The desirabil ity of separating powers and leaving
the states equipped with a broad array of rights and
responsibilities was not controversial at the Philadelphia convention because the Framers' experiences

checks and balances

Authority shared by
three branches of government.
e numerated powers Powers given to the
national government alone.
reserved powers Powers given to the state
government alone.
concurren t power s Powers shared by the
national and state governments.

29

30

Chapter 2

The Constitution

with British rule and state government under the
Articles had shaped their view of human nature.
These experiences had taught most of the
Framers that people would seek their own advantage
in and out of politics; this pursuit of self-interest.
unchecked. wou ld lead some people to exploit others.
Human nature was good enough to make it possible
to have a decent government that was based on popular consent. but it was not good enough to make it
inevitable. One solution to this problem would be to
improve human nature. Ancient political philosophers such as Aristotle believed that the first task of
any government was to cultivate virtue among the
governed.
Many Americans were of the same mind. To them
Americans would first have to become good people
before they could have a good government. Samuel
Adams. a leader of the Boston Tea Party. said that the
new nation must become a "Christian Sparta." Others spoke of the need to cultivate frugality. industry.
temperance. and simplicity.
But to James Madison and the other architects of
the Constitution. the deliberate cu ltivation of virtue
would require a government too strong and thus too
dangerous to liberty. at least at the national level.
Self-interest. freely pursued within reasonable limits.
was a more practical and durable solution to the
problem of government than any effort to improve
the virtue of the citizenry. He wanted. he said. to
make republican government possible "even in the
absence of political virtue."
Madison argued that the very self-interest that
leads people toward factionalism and tyranny might.
if properly harnessed by appropriate constitutional
arrangements. provide a source of unity and a guarantee of liberty. This harnessing was to be accomplished by dividing the offices of the new government
among many people and giving to the holder of each

separation of powers

Constitutional authority is shared by three different branches of
government.

faction A group with a distinct political interest.
Federalists Those who favor a stronger
national government.
Those who favor a weaker
national government.

Antifederalists

office the "necessary means and personal motives to
resist encroachments of the others." In this way
"ambition must be made to counteract ambition" so
that "the private interest of every ind ividua l may be
a sentinel over the public rights."] 1 If men were
angels. all th is would be unnecessary. But Madison
and the other delegates pragmatically insisted on
taking human nature pretty much as it was. and
therefore they adopted "this policy of supplying. by
opposite and rival interests. the defect of better
motives."12 The separation of powers would
work. not in spite of the imperfections of human
nature. but because of them.
So also with federalism. By dividing power
between the states and the national government. one
level of government can serve as a check on the
other. This should provide a "double security" to the
rights of the people: "The different governments will
control each other. at the same time that each will be
controlled by itself."13 This was especially likely to
happen in America. Madison thought. because it was
a large country filled with diverse interests- rich and
poor. Protestant and Catholic. northerner and southerner. farmer and merchant. creditor and debtor.
Each of these interests would constitute a faction
that would seek its own advantage. One faction
might come to dominate government. or a part of
government. in one place. and a different and rival
faction might dominate it in another. The pulling and
hauling among these factions would prevent any single government- say. that of New York- from dominating all of government. The division of powers
among several governments would give to virtually
every faction an opportunity to gain some-but not
full-power.

"*

The Constitution and Liberty

A more difficult question is whether the Constitution
created a system of government that would respect
personal liberties. And that in fact is the question
that was debated in the states when the document
was presented for ratification. The proponents of the
Constitution called themselves the Federalists
(though they might more accurately have been
called "nationalists"). The opponents ca me to be
known as the Antifederalists (though they might

The Constitution and Liberty
more accurately have been called "states' righters").*
To be put into effect. the Constitution had to be
approved at ratifying conventions in at least nine
states. This was perhaps the most democratic feature
of the Constitution: it had to be accepted. not by the
existing Congress (still limping along under the Articles of Confederation). nor by the state legislatures.
but by special conventions elected by the people.
Though democratic. the process established by the
Framers for ratifying the Constitution was technically illegal. The Articles of Confederation. which
still governed. could be amended only with the
approval of all thirteen state legislatures. The
Framers wanted to bypass these legislatures because
they feared that. for reasons of ideology or out of a
desire to retain their powers. the legislators would
oppose the Constitution. The Framers wanted ratification with less than the consent of all thirteen
states because they knew that such unanimity could
not be attained . And indeed the conventions in North
Carolina and Rhode Island did initially reject the
Constitution.

31

Ratification of the Federal Constitution by State
Conventions. 1787-1790

VIRGIN IA

ATLANTIC
OCEAN
NORTH CAROLINA

The Antifederalist View
The great issue before the state conventions was liberty. not democracy. The opponents of the new Constitution. the AntifederaJists. had a variety of
objections but were in general united by the belief
that liberty could be secure only in a small republic in
which the rulers were physically close to-and closely checked by- the ruled. Their central objection was
stated by a group of Antifederalists at the ratifying
convention in an essay published just after they had
lost: "a very extensive territory cannot be governed
on the principles of freedom. otherwise than by a
confederation of republics."14
These dissenters argued that a strong national
government would be distant from the people and
would use its powers to annihilate or absorb the
functions that properly belonged to the states. Con-

* To the delegates a truly "federal" system was one, like
the New Jersey Plan, that allowed for very strong states and
a weak national government. When the New Jersey Plan
lost, the delegates who defeated it began using the word
federal to describe their plan even though it ca lled for a
stronger national government. Thus men who began as
" Federalists" at th e convention ultimately became known
as "Antifedera lists" during the struggle over ratification .

o
D
D

Strongly in favor, ratified early
Initially opposed. later ratified
Ratified initially after close struggle

gress would tax heavily. the Supreme Court would
overrule state courts. and the president would come
to head a large standing army. (Since all these things
have occurred. we cannot dismiss the Antifederalists
as cranky obstructionists who opposed without justification the plans of the Framers.) These critics
argued that the nation needed. at best. a loose confederation of states. with most of the powers of government kept ftrmly in the hands of state legislatures
and state courts.
But if a stronger national government was to be
created. the Antifederalists argued. it should be
hedged about with many more restrictions than
those in the constitution then under consideration.
They proposed several such limitations. including
narrowing the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.

32

Chapter 2

The Constitution

The Federalist Papers
In 1787. to help win ratification of the new Constitution in the New York state convention.
Alexander Hamilton decided to publish a series of
articles defending and explaining the document in
the New York City newspapers. He recruited John
Jay and James Madison to help him. and the three
of them. under the pen name "Publius." wrote
eighty-five articles that appeared from late 1787
through 1788. The identity of the authors was
kept secret at the time. but we now know that
Hamilton wrote fifty-one of them. Madison
twenty-six. and Jay five. and that Hamilton and
Madison jointly authored three.
The Federalist papers probably played only a
small role in securing ratification. Like most legislative battles. this one was not decisively influenced by philosophical writings. But these essays
have had a lasting value as an authoritative and
profound explanation of the Constitution. Though
written for political purposes. the Federalist has
become the single most important piece of American political philosophy ever produced. Ironically
Hamilton and Madison were later to become political enemies; even at the Philadelphia convention
they had different views of the kind of government
that should be created. But in 1787-1788 they
were united in the belief that the new constitution
was the best that could have been obtained under
the circumstances.
Although Hamilton wrote most of the Federalist
papers. Madison wrote the two most famous articles-Nos. 10 and 51. reprinted here in the Appendix. After you have finished this chapter. turn to
the Appendix and try to read them. On your fIrst
reading of the papers you may find Madison's language difficult to understand and his ideas overly
complex. The following pointers will help you decipher his meaning.
In Federalist No. 10 Madison begins by stating
that "a well constructed Union" can "break and
control the violence of faction." He goes on to
define a "faction" as any group of citizens who
attempt to advance their ideas or economic interests at the expense of other citizens. or in ways that

James Madison

John Jay

Alexander Hamilton

conflict with "the permanent and aggregate interests of the community" or "public good." Thus
what Madison terms "factions" are what we today
call "special interests."
One way to defeat factions . according to Madison. is to remove whatever causes them to arise in
the fIrst place. This can be attempted in two ways.
First. government can deprive people of the liberty they need to organize: "Liberty is to faction
what air is to fire." But that is surely a cure
"worse than the disease." Second. measures can
be taken to make alJ citizens share the same ideas.
feelings. and economic interests. However. as
Madison observes. some people are smarter or
more hard working than others. and this "diversity in the faculties" of citizens is bound to result

The Constitution and Liberty

}>Ol'

t he Illdep:'!/r!Ol!

:tcun:tll.

F'CE DERALIS '1\ No. X.
To tht: People of the Srat,e of

New- York.

AMu,N G tht~limerQo·t ~d\,2'ft3;is p~oih".fcd by,'
':<1 well cou.h·utied Vllion; none Jerer ve ~ to be ' morc
'a cfuratefy 'd~ v :lop~~'l -d~.an ii~~\e n~ency t?,br<~,~ and,:
coi't,roL th,· vlgte,I]ce, i>f b~\l, ,.:rhe £nend...;.9l po.
pul-::.r gov,el'nm:i1~, never fiiids hiuJfelf ' [0 mudl
"l arme.{ ,fur th eir cliaraC\cr {od fate, ilS whe:! he con, em'p lates theirptopenfity 'to 'tl!is dangerous vice, He
· will not fail thtrd'ol'l;! III fet a Que ,v alu.: o'n ,imy ,phn
which, wit!\oilt '.violating the principl c ~ to which he
, is attache~. provdcs a proper cu'i e for if. The infrability, injuftk:: alld co,!ftili"Il 'introduced ,into the
,publi.c colt'neils, have in truth beent-he mortal di~
· f::aCes under whi ,~ h popular goveromen~$ ha've every
where,perilhe,d ~as they continue to ,be t~e .!·;lvorite
,and'fr.'Uidul ~o pics, from which the adverfaries to li· berf)" ,derive their molt fpecious dl:c1amation's. The
"', vafuable -r.~pra\lemeuts'"ll1ad'e by the American COIl)titlitiotis ~,n the, p'0pular mooels. , bpth an cient and
' moderut'canhdt cert~inly be t06 rltll di admired ,; but
, jtw~~IJ 'be
Iln'i.Val rantahle partilility, to, contend
'~t h:tt ,t hey h~ve as 'ffi'etiuaHy obviated the danger on
this fide 35 was wilhed and ex petied.. Complaints arc
eve!)' where heard fWIlI (lUI' !!lolt 'i:onli~erate and vir~
''t~ OIls citih'ris, 'equally ' die ~friend's of public lind
pl-lVlll'C faith, and of pulllie and perfonlilliberty i-that.
, (lui, ~overnme~is ~re ~oo ' u,~'ftable ;; that tht ptlblic
gC)od is dirr~g~d~~ iir tJi~ ~df'ii.fuof ri~~l i>arties ;
~ a·Il,i1'th.at llIear~~s .are to often 'de~j~ed, 'l,ot}cc<;X~i~g
· .t.6 th~ ~u!~..s at JuJhc~, ..~~.~..th~ ,!,~h1S ?f .the , mlOQI"
party j 6ut.l>Y ,the fupenyr /tree of an IIlterefted and
uv,<:(: beariIlSz:' majoritv. However aniciiHlllv We m~

an

in different economic interests as some people
acquire more property than others. Consequently,
protecting property rights , not equalizing property
ownership, "is the first object of government."
Even if everyone shared the same basic economic
interests, they would still find reasons "to vex and
oppress each other" rather than cooperate "for
their common good." ReligiOUS differences. loyalties to different leaders, even "frivolous and fanciful distinctions " (not liking how other people dress
or their taste in music) can be fertile soil for factions, In Madison's view people are factious by
nature; the "causes of faction" are "sown " into
their very being.

Madison thus proposes a second and, he thinks,
more practical and desirable way of defeating faction, The way to cure "the mischiefs of faction " is
not by removing its causes but by "controlling its
effects." Factions will always exist. so the trick is to
establish a form of government that is likely to
serve the public good through the even-handed
"regulation of these various and interfering interests." Wise and public-spirited leaders can "adjust
these clashing interests and render them all subservient to the public good," but, he cautions.
"enlightened statesmen will not always be at the
helm. " (Madison implies that "enlightened statesmen "-such as himself. Washington, and
Jefferson-were at the "helm" of government in

1787.)
Madison's proposed cure for the evils of factions
is in fact nothing other than a republican form of
government. Use the following questions to gUide
your own analysis of Madison's ideas. Why does
Madison think the problem of a "minority" faction
is easy to handle? Conversely, why is he so troubled
by the potential of a majority faction ? How does he
distinguish direct democracy from republican government? What is he getting at when he terms
elected representatives "proper guardians of the
public weal." and why does he think that "extensive republics " are more likely to produce such representatives than small ones?
When you are finished with Federalist No. 10,
try your hand at Federalist No. 51. You will fmd
that the ideas in the former paper anticipate many
of those in the latter. And you will Ilnd many
points on which you mayor may not agree with
Madison. For example, do you agree with his
assumption that people-even your best friends or
college roommates-are factious by nature? Likewise, do you agree with his view that government
is "the greatest of all reflections on human
nature"?
By attempting to meet the mind of James Madison, you can sharpen your own mind and deepen
your understanding of American government.

33

34

Chapter 2

The COl1stitution

checking the pres ident's power by creating a co uncil
that wo uld review hi s actions, leaving military
affairs in the hands of the state militias, increas in g
the size of the House of Representatives so t hat it
would reflect a greater va ri ety of popul ar in terests.
and reducing or elimin ating the power of Co ngress
to levy taxes. And some of them insisted that a bill oj
rights be added to the Constitution.
James Madison gave his answer to these criticisms
in Federa list o. 10 a nd No. 51 (reprinted inA the
Appendix). It was a bold answer. for it fl ew squ arely
in the face of widespread popul ar sentiment and
much philosophi ca l writing. Fo ll ow ing the great
French political philosopher Montesquieu, many
Americans believed that liberty was safe only in
small societies governed either by direct democracy
or by large legislatures with sma ll districts and frequent turnover among members.
Madison argued quite the opposite-that liberty is
safest in large (or as he put it. "extended") republics.
In a sma ll community, he said. there will be relatively few differences in op inion or interest; people wi ll
tend to see the world in much the same way. If anyone dissents or pursues an individual interest. he or
she wi ll be confronted by a massive majority and will
have few. if any. a lli es. But in a large republic there
will be many opinions and interests; as a result it will
be hard for a tyrann ica l m ajority to form or organize.
and anyone with an unpop ular view w ill find it easier to acquire allies. If Madison 's argument seems
strange or abstract, ask yourself the foll owing question: if I have a n unpopular opinion. an exotic
lifestyle, or an unconventional interest. will I find
greater security living in a small town or a big city?
By favoring a large republic Madison was not trying to stifle democracy. Rather he was attemptin g to
show how democratic government rea lly works, and
what can make it work better. To ru le. different interests must come together and form a coalition- that
is, an a lli ance. In Federalist No. 51 he argued that the
coalitions that formed in a large republic would be
more moderate than those that formed in a sma ll one
because the bigger the republic, the greater the variety of interests, and thus the more a coalition of the
maj ority would have to accommodate a diversity of

coalition

An alliance of factions.

interests and opinions if it hoped to succeed. He concluded that in a nation the size of the United States.
with its enormous variety of in terests. "a coalition of
a majority of the whole society could seldom ta ke
place on any other principles than those of justice a nd
the genera l good." Wh ether he was right in that prediction is a matter to which we shall return repeatedly.
The implication of Madison's arguments was daring,
for he was suggesting that the national government
should be at some distance from the people and insulated [rom their momentary passions, beca use the people
did not always want to do the right thing. Liberty was
threatened as much (or even more) by public passions
and popularly based factions as by strong governments.
ow the Antifederalists themselves had no very lofty
view of human nature. as is evidenced by the deep suspicion with which they viewed "power-seeking" officeholders. What Madison did was take this view to its
logical conclusion, arguing that if people could be corrupted by orftce. they could also be corrupted by factional self-interest. Thus the government had to be designed
to prevent both the politicians and the people from usin g
it for ill-considered or unjust purposes.
To argue in 1 787 against the virtues of sma ll
democracies was like arguing against motherhood . bu t
the argument prevailed, probably because many citizens were convinced that a reasonably strong national
governm ent was essential if the nation were to stand
united against foreign enemies, facilitate COlTUllerce
among the states, guard against domestic insurrections. and keep one fa ction fro m oppressin g another.
The political realities of the moment and the recent bitter experiences with the Articles probably counted for
more in ratifyin g the Constitution than did Madison's
arguments. His cause was helped by the fact that. for al l
their legitimate concerns and their uncanny instinct
for what the future might bring, the AntifederaLists
could offer no agreed-upon alternative to the new Constitution. In po litics, then as now, you cmmot beat
somethin g with nothing.
But this does not explain why the £iramers failed to
add a bill of rights to the Constitution. If they were so
preoccupied with liberty, why didn 't they tal<e this most
obviou s step toward protecting liberty, especially since
the Antil'e deraLists were demanding it? Some historians
have suggested that this omiss ion was evidence that
liberty was not as important to the Framers as they
cl aimed. In fact when one delegate suggested that a bill
of rights be drawn up, the state delegations at the con-

The Constitution and Liberty
vention unanimously voted the idea down. There were
several reasons for this.
First. the Constitution, as written, did contain a
number of specific guara ntees of individual liberty,
including the right of trial by jury in crinwal cases a nd
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. The liberties guaranteed in the Constitution (before the Bill of
Rights was added) are listed below.
• Writ of habeas corpus may not be suspended
(except during invasion or rebellion) .
• No bill of attainder may be passed by Con gress
or the states.
• No ex post facto law may be passed by Congress
or the states.
• Right of tria l by jury in criminal cases is guaranteed.
• The citizens of each state are entitled to the privileges and immu n ities of the citizens of every other
state.
• No religious test or qualification for holding federa l office is imposed.
• No law impairing the obli gation of contracts may
be passed by the states.
Second, most states in 1787 h ad bills of rights.
When Elbridge Gerry proposed to the co nvention
that a federal bill of rights be drafted, Roger Sherman rose to observe that it was unnecessary beca use
the state bills of rights were sufficient. IS
But th ird, and perhaps most important, the
Framers thought they were creating a government
with specific, limited powers. It could do , they
thought, on ly what the Constitution gave it the power
to do, and nowhere in that document was there permission to infringe on freedom of speech or of the
press or to impose cruel and unusua l punishments .
Some delegates probably feared that if any serious
effort were made to list the rights that were guara nteed, later officials might assume that they had the
power to do anything not explicitly forbidden.

Need for a Bill of Rights
Whatever their reasons, the Framers made at least
a tactical and perhaps a fundamental mistake. It
quickly became clear that without at least the promise of a bill of rights, the Constitution would not be
ratified. Though the small states, pleased by their
equa l representation in the Senate, quickly ratified
(in Delaware, New Jersey, and Georgia, the vote in

the conventions was unanimous), the battl e in the
large states was intense and the ou tcome un certain.
In Pennsy lvania Federalist supporters dragged boycotting Antifederalists to the legislature in order to
ensure that a quorum was present so that a convention co uld be called. There were rumors of other
rough tactics.
In Massachusetts the Constitution was approved
by a nar row majority, but only after key leaders promised'to obtain a bill of rights. In Virgini a James Madison fou ght aga inst th e fiery Patri ck Henry, whose
cl imactic speech against ratiJ1cation was dramatically
punctuated by a noisy thunderstorm outside. The
Federalists won by ten votes. In New York Alexander
Ha milton argued the case for six weeks against the
determined oppos ition of most of the state's key politica l leaders; he carried the day, but only by three
votes, and then only after New York City threatened to
secede from the state if it did not ratify. By June 21 ,
1788, the ninth state- ew Hampshire-had rati[led, and the Constitution was law.
Despite the bitterness of the ratification stru ggle,
the new government that took office in 1789- 1790,
h eaded by Pres ident Washington, was greeted
enthusiastica lly. By the spring of 1790 all thirteen
states had ratified. There rema ined , however, the task
of fulfilling the promise of a bill of rights. To that end
James Madison introduced into the first session of
the First Congress a set of proposals, many based on
the existing Virg inia bill of rig hts. Twelve were
approved by Cong ress; ten of these were ratified by
the states and went into effect in 1791. These
a mendments did not limit the power of state governments over citize ns, only the power of the federal
government. Later the Fourteenth Amendment, as
in terpreted by the Supreme Court, extended many of
the guarantees of the Bill of Rights to cover state governmental action.
habeas corpus An order to produce an arrested person before a judge.
bill of attainder A law that declares a person,
without a trial, to be guilty of a crime.
ex post facto law A law that makes an act
criminal although the act was legal when it
was committed.
Bill of Rights First ten amendments to the
Constitution.

35

36

Chapter 2

The Constitution

HOW THINGS WORK
The Bill of Rights
The First Ten Amendments to the Constitution
Grouped by Topic and Purpose

Protections Afforded Citizens to Participate in the
Political Process
Amendment 1: Freedom of religion, speech, press,
and assembly; the right to petition the government.
Protections Against Arbitrary Police and Court Action
Amendment 4: No un reasonable searches or seizures.
Amendment 5: Grand jury indictme nt required to
prosecute a person for a ser ious crime.
No "double jeopardy " (be ing t ried twice for the
same offe nse).
Fo rci ng a person to t estify aga inst himse lf o r herself
prohibited .
No loss of life, liberty, or prope rty without due
process.

Amendment 7: Jury trials in civil suits where value
exceeds $20.
Amendment 8: No excessive ba ilor fines, no cruel
and unusual punishments.
Protections of States' Rights and Unnamed Rights
of People
Amendment 9: Unlisted rights are not necessarily
denied .
Amendment 10: Powers not delegated to the United
States o r de nied to states are reserved to the
states.
Other Amendments
Amendment 2: Right to bear arms .
Amendment 3: Troops may not be quartered in
homes in peacetime.

Amendment 6: Right to speedy, public, impartial
trial with defense counsel a nd right to crossexamine witnesses.

The Constitution and Slavery
Though black slaves amounted to one-third of the
population of the i1ve southern states, nowhere in the
Constitution can one i1nd the word slave or slavery .
To some the fa ilure of the Constitution to address
the qu estion of slavery was a great betrayal of the
promise of the Declaration of Independence that "all
men are created equa l. "16 For the Constitution to be
silent on the subj ect of slavery, a nd thereby to a llow
that odi ous practice to continu e. was to convert, by
implication. the wording of the Declaration to "a ll
white men are created equa l. "
It is easy to accuse the signers of the Declaration a nd
the Constitution of hypocrisy. They knew of slavery,
many of them owned slaves, and yet they were silent.
Indeed. British opponents of the independence movement took special delight in taunting the colonists
about their compla in ts of being "enslaved" to the
British Empire while ignoring the slavery in their very

midst. Increasingly. revolutionary leaders during this
period spoke to this issue. Thomas Jefferson had tried to
get a clause opposing the slave trade put into the Declaration of Independence. James Otis of Boston had
attacked slavery and argued that black as well as white
men should be free. As revolutionary fervor mounted.
so did northern criticism of slavery. The Massachusetts
legislature and then the Continental Congress voted to
end the slave trade; Delaware prohibited the importation of slaves: Pennsylvania voted to tax it out of existence; and Connecticut and Rhode Island decided that
aU slaves brought into those states would automatically become free.
Slavery continued un abated in the South. defended by some whites because they thought it right. by
others beca use they found it useful. But even in the
South there were opponents. though rarely conspicuous ones. George Mason , a large Virginia slaveholder a nd a delegate to the conven tion. warned
prophetically that "by an inevitable ch a in of causes

The Motives of the Framers

The Constitution was silent on slavery. and so buying and selling slaves
continuedJor many years.

and effects. providence punishes national sins [slavery] by national calamities."17
The blunt fact. however. was that any effort to use
the Constitution to end slavery would have meant
the end of the Constitution. The southern states
would never have signed a document that seriously
interfered with slavery. Without the southern states
there would have been a continuation of the Articles
of Con federation. which would have left each state
entirely sovereign and thus entirely free of any
prospective cha llenge to slavery.
Thus the Framers compromised with slavery; political scientist Theodore Lowi calls this their Greatest
Compromise. I S Slavery is dealt with in three places in
the Constitution. though never by name. In determining the representation each state was to have in the
House. "three-fIfths of all other persons" (that is, of
slaves) are to be added to "the whole number of free persons."19 The South originally wanted slaves to count
fully even though. of course, none would be elected to
the House; they settled for counting 60 percent of
them. The convention also agreed not to allow the new
government by law or even constitutional amendment
to prohibit the importation of slaves until the year
1808. 20 The South thus had twenty years in which it
could acquire more slaves from abroad; after that Congress was free (but not required) to end the importation.

Finally. the Constitution guaranteed that if a slave were
to escape his or her master and nee to a nonslave state.
the slave would be returned by that state to "the party
to whom ... service or labour may be due." 21
The unresolved issue of slavery was to prove the
most explosive question of all. Allowing slavery to
continue was a fateful deciSion. one that led to the
worst social and political catastrophe in the nation's
history- the Civ il War. The Framers chose to sidestep
the issue in order to create a union that. they hoped .
would eventually be strong enough to deal with the
problem when it could no longer be postponed. The
legacy of that choice continues to this day.

*

The Motives of the Framers

The Framers were not saints or demigods. They were
men with political opinions who also had economic
interests and human failings. It would be a mistake to
conclude that everything they did in 1787 was motivated by a disinterested commitment to the public good.
But it would be an equally great mistake to think that
what they did was nothing but an effort to Line their
pockets by producing a government that would serve
their own narrow interests. As in almost all human
endeavors. the Framers acted out of a mixture of

37

38

Chapter 2

The Constitution

This late eighteenth century cartoon shows the enthusiasm many
people had for the new Constitution.

motives. What is truly astonishing is that economic
interests played only a modest role in their deliberations.

Economic Interests at the Convention
Some of the Framers were wealthy; some were
not. Some owned slaves; some had none. Some were
creditors (having loaned money to the Continental
Congress or to private parties); some were deeply in
debt. For nearly a century scholars have argued over
just how important these personal interests were in
shaping the provisions of the Constitution.
In 1913 Charles Beard, a historian, published a
book-An Economic Interpretation of the Constitu-

tion- arguing that the better-off urban and commercial classes, especially those members who held
the IODs issued by the government to pay for the
Revolutionary War, favored the new Constitution
because they stood to benefit from it. 22 But in the
1950s that view was challenged by historians who,
after looking carefully at what the Framers owned or
owed, concluded that one could not explain the Constitution exclusively or even largely in terms of the
economic interests of those who wrote it. 23 Some of
the richest delegates, such as Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts and George Mason of Virginia, refused to

sign the document, while many of its key backersJames Madison and James Wilson, for examplewere men of modest means or heavy debts.
In the 1980s a new group of scholars, primarily
economists applying more advanced statistical techniques, found evidence that some economic considerations influenced how the Framers voted on some
issues during the Philadelphia convention. Interestingly, however. the economic position of the states
from which they came had a greater effect on their
votes than did their own monetary condition. 24
We have already seen how delegates from small
states fought to reduce the power of large states and
how those from slaveowning states made certain
that the Constitution would contain no provision
that would threaten slavery.
But contrary to what Beard asserted, the individual
interests of the Framers themselves did not dominate
the convention except in a few cases where a constitutional provision would have affected them directly. As
you might expect, all slaveowning delegates. even those
who did not live in states where slavery was commonplace (and several northern delegates owned slaves).
tended to vote for provisions that would have kept the
national government's power over slavery as weak as
possible. However, the effects of other personal business interests were surprisingly weak. Some delegates
owned a lot of public debt that they had purchased for
low prices. A strong national government of the sort
envisaged by the Constitution was more likely than the
weak Continental Congress to payoff this debt at face
value, thus making the delegates who owned it much
richer. Despite this, the ownership of public debt had no
signil1cant effect on how the Framers voted in Philadelphia. For example. five men who among them owned
one-third of all the public securities held by all the delegates voted against the Constitution. Nor did the big
land speculators vote their interests. Some. such as
George Washington and Robert Morris. favored the
Constitution, while others, such as George Mason and
William Blount, opposed it. 25
In sum the Framers tended to represent their
states' interests on important matters. Since they
were picked by the states to do so, this is exactly what
one would expect. If they had not met in secret. perhaps they would have voted even more often as their
constituents wanted. But except with respect to slavery, they usually did not vote their own economic
interests. They were reasonably but not wholly disinterested delegates who were probably influenced as
much by personal beliefs as by economics.

The Motives of the Framers

Economic Interests and Ratification
At the popularly elected state ratifying conventions,
economic factors played a larger role. Delegates who
were merchants. who lived in cities. who owned large
amounts of western land. who held government lO Us,
and who did not own slaves were more likely to vote
to ratify the new Constitution than were delegates
who were farmers. who did not own public debt. and
who did ow n slaves. 26 There were plenty of exceptions,
however. Small farmers dominated the conventions in
some states where the vote to rati{y was unanimous.
Though interests made a difference. they were not
simply elite interests. In most states the great majority of adult white males could vote for delegates to
the ratifying conventions. This means that women
and blacks were excluded from the debates, but by
the standards of the time- standards that did not
change for over a century- the ratification process
was remarkably democratic.

The Constitution and Equality
Ideas counted for as much as interests. At stake were
two views of the public good. One, espoused by the
Federalists. was that a reasonable balance of liberty,

order, and progress required a strong national government. The other. defended by the Antifederalists,
was that liberty wo uld not be secure in the hands of
a powerful. distant government: freedom required
decentralization.
Today that debate has a new locus. The defect of
the Constitution, to some contemporary critics. is not
that the government it created is too strong but that
it is too weak. In particular the national government
is too weak to resist the press ures of special interests
that reflect and perpetuate social inequality.
This criticism reveals how our understanding of
the relationship between liberty and equality has
ch anged since the Fo unding. To Jefferson and Madison citizens naturally differed in their talents and
qualities. What had to be guarded against was the
use of governmental power to create unnatural and
undesirable inequalities. This might happen, for
example, if political power was concentrated in the
hands of a few people (who could use that power to
give themselves special privileges) or if it was used
in ways that a ll owed so me private parties to acquire
exclusive char ters and monopolies. To prevent
the inequali ty that might result from having too
strong a government. its powers must be kept strictly limited.

W/Jridge Gerry (Jejl. 1744-181 4) was a wealthy Massacizusetts lIIerchall t II lId politiciall who
pllrticipated ill the cOllvelltioll !Jut reJused to sigll the COllstitUtiOIl. failles WilSall (right.
1 742- 1798) of Pellllsylvallia. a brilliant la wyer alld terri!Jle busillesslllall. was the prillcipal
challlpioll of tile popular election of the House. Near tile elld of his IiJe he was jailed repeatedly jor
debts illcurred as a result of his business speculations.

39

40

Chapter 2

The Constitutiol1

Today so me peopl e think of inequality quite differently. To them it is the natura l socia l order- the
marketpl ace a nd the acquisitive ta lents of peo ple
operating in that marketplace- that leads to undesirable in equalities. especia lly in eco nomi c power.
The government sho uld be powerful enough to
restra in th ese natura l tendencies a nd produ ce. by
law. a greater degree of equ a li ty tha n society allows
when left a lone.
To the Fram ers liber ty a nd (politica l) equality were
not in conflict; to so me people today th ese two principles are deeply in conOi ct. To the Framers the task was
to keep government so limited as to prevent it from
creatin g the worst inequality- political privilege. To
some modern observers the task is to make government strong enough to reduce what they believe is the
worst inequality-differences in wealth.

Constitutional Reform:
Modern Views
Almost (rom the day it was ratified, the Constitution
has been the obj ect of debate over ways in which it
might be improved. These debates have rarely involved
the average citizen , who tends to revere the document
even if he or she cannot recall a ll its detail s. Beca use of
this deep a nd broa d pop ular support, scholars a nd
politicia ns have been wary of attackin g the Constitution or suggesting ma ny wholesale cha nges. But such
attacks have occurred. During the 1980s- the decade
in which we celebrated the bicentennia l of its adoption- we heard a variety of suggestions for improving
the Constitution , ran ging from par ticular amendments to wholesale revisions. In general there are
today, as in the eighteenth century. two kinds of critics: those who think the federal government is too
weak and those who think it is too strong.

Reducing the Separation of Powers
To the first kind of critic the chief difTiculty with the
Constitution is the sepa ration of powers. By ma kin g
every decision th e un cer ta in outcome of th e pullin g
and ha uling between the president and Con gress,
th e Co nstitution precl ud es the emergence- except
perha ps in times of cri sis- of the kind of effective
nationa l leadership the cou ntry needs. In this vi ew
our nation today faces a number of challenges th at
require pro mpt. decisive, a nd comprehensive action.

Our problem is gridlock. Our position of internationallea dership, the da ngerou s and unprecedented
proliferation of nucl ea r wea pons among th e na tion s
of the globe. a nd the need to find ways of stimulating
eco nomi c growth whil e reducing our deficit and
co nserving our environm ent- all these situations
require tha t the pres ident be able to formulate and
ca rry out poli cies free of some of the pressures and
delays from in terest gro ups a nd members of Con gress tied to local interests.
Not only would thi s increase in pres idential
a uthority make for better policies, these critics argue.
it would also help the voters hold the president and
his party accountable for their actions. As matters
now sta nd , nobody in government ca n be h eld
responsible for policies: everybody takes the credit for
successes a nd nobody takes the blame for failures.
Typically the president. who tends to be the major
source of new progra ms. cannot get his policies
adopted by Co ngress without long delays and much
barga ining. the r es ul t of which ofte n is some
watered-dow n compromise th at neith er the pres ident nor Co ngress really li kes but that each must settle for if a nything is to be done at a li.
Fina lly, critics of the separation of powers compla in that the government agencies responsible for
impl ementin g a program a re exposed to undue interference fro m leg islators a nd specia l interests. In thi s
view th e pres ident is supposed to be in charge of th e
bureaucracy but in fact must sha re this a uthority
with coun tless members of Co ngress a nd congressional committees.
Not all critics of the sepa ration of powers agree
with a ll these points, nor do they all agree on what
should be done about the problems. But they all h ave
in common a fear that the separation of powers
makes the president too weak and insufficiently
accountable. Their proposals for redu cing the separation of powers include the follo wing:
• Allow the president to appoint members of Congress to serve in the ca binet (the Constitution forbids members of Co ngress from holding any
federa l a ppointi ve offi ce while in Congress).
• All ow the pres ident to disso lve Co ngress a nd ca ll
for a specia l election (e lecti ons now ca n be held
only on the schedul e determined by the ca lend ar) .
• All ow Co ngress to require a pres ident who has
lost its confidence to face the country in a specia l
election before his term wo uld normally end.

COl1stitutiol1al Reform: Modem Views

Were Women Left Out of the Constitution?
one sense, yes: Women were nowhere mentioned in the Constitution when it was written in
1 787. Moreover, Article I, which set forth the provisions for electing members of the House of Representatives, granted the vote to those people who
were allowed to vote for members of the lower
house of the legislature in the states in which they
resided. In no state at the time could women participate in those elections. In no state could they
vote in any elections or hold any offices. Furthermore, wherever the Constitution uses a pronoun, it
uses the masculine form- he or him.
[n another sense, no: Wherever the Constitution
or the Bill of Rights defines a right that people are
to have, it either grants that right to "persons" or
"citizens," not to "men," or it makes no mention at
all of people or gender. For example:
• "The citizens of each State sha ll be entitled to all
privileges and immunities of citizens of the sev[Art. I, sec. 9]
eral States."
[n

• "No person shall be convicted of treason unless
on the testimony of two witnesses to the same
overt act, or on confession in open court. "
[Art. III, sec. 3]
• "No bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall be
passed."
[Art. I, sec. 9]
• "The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be
violated ."
[Amend. IV]
• "No person shall be held to answer for a capital,
or otherwise infamous crime, unless on presentment or indictment of a grand jury ... nor shall
any person be subject for the same offense to be
twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; ... nor be
deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due
process of law. "
[Amend. V]
• "In all criminal prosecutions the accused sha ll
enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an
impartial jury."
[Amend. VI]
Moreover, when the qualiilcations for elective
office are stated, the word person, not mall, is used.

• "No person shall be a Representative who shall
not have attained to the age of twenty-five
years."
[Art. I, sec. 2]
• "No person shall be a Senator who shall not have
attained to the age of thirty years. "
[Art. I, sec. 3]
• "No person except a natural born citizen ... shall
be eligible to the office of President; neither shall
any person be eligible to that office who shall not
have attained to the age of thirty-five years."
[Art. II, sec. 1]
In places the Constitution and the Bill of Rights
used the pronoun ile, but always in the context of
referring back to a person or citizen. At the time,
and until quite recently, the male pronoun was
often used in legal documents to refer generically
to both men and women.
Thus, though the Constitution did not give
women the right to vote until the Nineteenth
Amendment was ratified in 1920, it did use language that extended fundamental rights, and
access to office, to women and men equally.
Of course what the Constitution permitted did
not necessarily occur. State and local laws denied
to women rights that in principle they ought to
have enjoyed. Except for a brief period in New Jersey, no women voted in statewide elections until , in
1869, they were given the right to cast ballots in
territorial elections in Wyoming.
When women were first elected to Congress,
there was no need to change the Constitution;
nothing in it restricted officeholding to men.
When women were given the right to vote by
constitutional amendment, it was not necessary to
amend any existing language in the Constitution,
because nothing in the Constitution itself denied
women the right to vote; the amendment simply
added a new right:
• "The right of citizens of the United States to vote
shall not be denied or abridged by the United
States or any state on account of sex."
[Amend. XIX]
Source: Adapted from Robert Goldw in, "Why Blacks. Women and
Jews Are Not Mentioned in the Const itution. " Commentary (May

1987) 28-33.

41

42

Cl1 apter 2

Th e Constitution

HOW THINGS WORK

Ways of Amending the Constitution
Under Article V there are two ways to propose
amendments to the Constitution and two ways to
ratify them .
To Propose an Amendment
1. Two-thirds of both houses of Congress vote to
propose an amendment, or
2. Two-thirds of the state legislatures ask Congress
to cal l a national convention to propose amendments.
To Ratify an Amendment
1. Th ree-fourths of the state legislatu res approve it,
or
2. Ratifying conventions in three-fourth s of th e
states approve it .

Require the presidential and congressiona l ca ndidates to run as a team in each congressional distTict;
thus a presidential candidate who car ries a given
district could be sure that the congressiona l cand idate of his party would aJso win in that district.
• Have the pres ident serve a single six-year term
instead of being eli gible for up to two four-year
terms: this wou ld presumably [ree the president to
lead without hav ing to worry about reelection.
• Lengthen the terms of members of the House of
Representatives from two to four years so th at the
entire House would stand for reelection at the
sa me time as the presiden t. 27
Some of these proposals are offered by critics out
of a desire to make the American system of government work more like the British parliamentar y system, in which , as we shall see in Chapters 13 and 14,
the prime minister is the und isputed lea der of the
majority in the British Parliament. The parliamenamendment A new provision in the Constitution that has been ratified by the states.

Some Key Facts
• Only the first method of proposing an amendment
has been used .
• The second method of ratification has been used
only once, to ratify the Twenty-first Amendment
(repealing Prohibition).
• Congress may limit th e time within which a proposed amendment must be ratified . The usual limitation has been seven years.
• Thousands of proposals have been made, but only
thirty-three have obtained the necessary twothirds vote in Congress.
• Twenty-seven amendments have been rat ified .
• The first ten amendments, ratified on December
15, 1791, are known as the Bill of Rights .

tary system is the major a lternative in the world
today to the American separation-of-powers system.
Both the diagnosis and the remedies proposed by
these critics of the sepa ration of powers have been
challenged. Many defenders of our present constitutional system believe that nations, such as Great
Britain, with a different, more unified political system have don e no better than the United States in
dea ling with the prob lems of eco nomic growth,
national security, and environmental protection .
Moreover, they argue, close con gressional scrutiny of
pres identi a l proposa ls ha s improved these policies
more often than it has weakened them. Finally, congress ional "interference" in the work of government
agencies is a good way of ensuring that the average
citizen can fi ght back against the bureaucracy; without that so-ca lled interference, citizens and interest
groups might be helpless before big and powerfu l
agencies.
Each of the specific proposals, defenders of the
present constitutional system a rgue, wou ld eith er
ma ke matters worse or have, a t best. uncerta in
effects. Adding a few members of Congress to the
president's cabinet would not prov ide mu ch help in

COl1stitutiol1al Reform: Modem Views
getting his program th rough Congress; there are 535
senators and representatives, and probably on ly
about half a dozen wou ld be in the cabinet. Giving
either the president or Congress the power to ca ll a
special election in between the regu lar elections
(every two or four years) would cause needless confusion and great expense; the country would live
under the threat of being in a perpetual political
campa ign with even weaker political parties. Link ing
the fate of the president and congressiona l candidates by having them run as a team in each district
would red uce the stabilizing and moderating effect of
having them elected separately. A Republican presidential candidate who wins in the new system would
have a Republican majority in the House; a Democratic candidate winn er would have a Democratic
majority. We might as a result expect dramatic
changes in policy as the political pendulum swung
back and forth. Giving presidents a sin gle six-year
term would indeed free them from the need to worry
abo ut reelection, but it is precisely that worry that
keeps presidents reasonably concerned about what
the American people want.

Making the System Less Democratic
The second kind of critic of the Constitution thinks
the government does too much, not too li tt le.
Though the separation of powers at one time may
have slowed the growth of government and moderated the policies it adopted, in the last few decades
government has grown helter-skelter. The problem,
these critics argue, is not that democracy is a bad
idea but that democracy can produce bad , or at least
un intended, results if the government caters to the
specia l-interest claims of the citizens rather than to
their long-term values.
To see how these unintended results might occur,
imagine a situation in which every citizen thinks the
government grows too big. taxes too heavily, and
spends too much. Each citizen wants the government
made small er by reducing the benefits other people
get-but not by reducing the benefits he or she gets.
In fact such citizens may even be wi llin g to see their
own benefits cut, provided everybody else's are cut as
well , and by a like amount.
But the political system attends to individual
wants, not general preferences. It gives aid to farmers, contracts to industry, grants to professors, pensions to the elderly, and loans to students. As
someone once said , the government is like an add ing

..

machine: during elections cand id ates campaign by
promising to do more for whatever group is dissatisfied with what the incumbents are doing for it. As a
result most elections bring to office men and women
who are committed to doing more for somebody. The
grand total of all these additions is more for everybody. Few politicians have an incentive to do less for
anybody.
To remedy this state of affairs, these critics suggest various mechanisms, but principally a constitutional amendment that would either set a limit on
the amount of money the government could collect
in taxes each year or require that each year the government have a balanced bud get (that is, not spend
more than it takes in in taxes) , or both. In some versions of these plans an extraordinary majority (say,
60 percent) of Congress cou ld override these limits,
and the limits wou ld not apply in warti me.
The effect of such amendments, the proponents
claim, would be to force Congress and the president
to look at the big picture- the grand total of what
they are spend ing- rather than just to operate the
adding machine by pushing the "add" button over
and over again. If they could spend on ly so much
during a given year, they wou ld have to allocate what
they spend among all rival claimants. For example, if
more money were to be spent on the poor, less cou ld
then be spent on the military, or vice versa.
Some cr itics of an overly powerful federal government think these amendments will not be passed or
may prove unworkable; instead they favor enhancing the president's power to block spending by giving
him a line-item veto. Most state governors can veto
a particular part of a bill and approve the rest using
a line-item veto. The theory is that such a veto would
better equip th e president to stop unwarranted
spending without vetoing the other provisions of a
bill. In 1996 President Clinton signed the Line Item
Veto Act, passed by the 104th Congress. But despite
its name, the new law did not give the president full
line-item veto power (on ly a change in the Constitution cou ld confer that power). Instead the law gave
the president authority to selectively elimin ate individual items in large appropriations bills, expansions

line-item veto

An executive's ability to block
a particular provision in a bill passed by the
legislature.

43

Hou~e Backs Amendment

to GIve President New
Veto Power

June 27
WASHINGTON
Yesterday the House of
to- I 20 vote, proposed an RepreSentatives, by a 315stltution that wo uId gIve
. amendment to the USC
fi t
. . onto veto a particular part of II ure presidents the POWer
The Senate will debate th abbll!ll and approve the rest.
e I next week .. .

MEMORANDUM
To: Senator Marty Lieb
From: Joseph Miceli, general counsel
Subject: Line-Item Veto Amendment
In 1996 you voted in favor of the Line Item Veto Act, which authorized the president
to selectively eliminate items in certain appropriations bills subject to such exemptions
as Congress might make. Despite its narrow application, the Supreme Court has
declared the law unconstitutional. The amendment being debated next week would
confer full line-item veto power on the president.
Arguments for:
1. Forty-three state constitutions, most of them explicitly modeled on the u.s.
Constitution, confer line-item veto power on governors.
2. The line-item veto has equipped many governors to stop unwarranted spending
without stopping the sensible provisions of a bill.
3. Most people favor giving the president this authority and holding him accountable.
Arguments against:
1. The national government is different. The Founding Fathers considered many veto
alternatives and limited the president's "qualified negative" power to rejecting a
bill in its entirety, subject to an override by a two-thirds vote of Congress.
2. There is no clear evidence that the line-item veto restrains state spending or that
the aforementioned 1996 law restrained federal spending.
3. Popular support for the line-item veto dwindles when people are reminded about
our system's separation of powers and checks and balances.
Your decision:
Favor amendment _ __
Oppose amendment _ __

Con stitutional Reform: Modern Views
in certa in income-transfer programs, and tax breaks
(giv ing the president what bud get experts ca ll
enhanced rescission authority). But it a lso left Congress
free to cra ft bills in ways that would give the president few opportunities to veto (or rescilld) favored
items. For example, Congress could still force the
president to accept or reject an entire appropriations
bill simply by tagging on this sentence: "Appropriations provided under this act (or title or section) sha ll
not be subj ect to the provisions of the Line Item Veto
Act. " In Clin ton et of. v. New York et al. (1998), the
Supreme Court struck down the 1996 law, holding 6
to 3 that the Constitution does not a llow the president to ca ncel specific items in tax and spending
legislation.
Fina lly, some of these critics of a powerful government feel that the rea l problem a rises not from an
excess of "adding-mach ine" democracy but from
the growth in the power of the federal courts, as
described in Chapter 16. What these critics would
like to do is devise a set of laws or constitutiona l
a mendments that would narrow the authority of
federa l co urts.
The opponents of these suggestions argue that
constitutional amendments to restrict the level of
taxes or to require a balanced budget are unworkable, even assuming- which they do not- that a
smaller government is desirable. There is no precise.
agreed -upon way to measure how much the government spends or to predict in advance how much it
will receive in taxes during the year: thus defining
and enforcing a "balanced budget" is no easy matter.
Since the government ca n a lways borrow money, it
might easily evade any spend ing limits . It has also
shown great ingenuity in spend ing money in ways
that never appear as part of the regular budget.
The lin e-item veto mayor may not be a good idea.
Unless the Constitution is amended to permit it,
future preSidents wi ll have to do without it. The
states, where some governors have long had the veto,
are quite different from the federal government in
power and responsibilities. Whether a line-item veto
wou ld work as well in Washington , D.C., as it does in

many state capitals is something that we may simply
never know.
Fina lly, proposals to curtail judicia l power are
thinly veiled attacks, the opponents argue, on the
ability of the courts to protect essentia l citi zen rights.
If Congress and the people do not like the way the
Supreme Court h as interpreted the Co nstitution,
they can a lways amend the Co nstitution to change a
specific ruling; there is no need to adopt some acrossthe-board limitation on court powers.

Who Is Right?
Some of the arguments of these two sets of critics of
the Constitution may strike you as plausible or even
entirely convincing. Whatever yo u may ultimately
decide, decide nothing far now. One cannot make or
remake a co nstitution based entirely on abstract reasoning or unproven factual arguments. Even when
the Constitution was first written in 1787, it was n ot
an exercise in abstract philosophy but rather an
effort to so lve pressing, practical problems in the
li ght or a theory of human nature, the lessons of
past experience, and a close consideration of how
governments in other countries and at other times
had worked.
Just because the Constitution is over two hundred
years old does not mean that it is out-of-date. The
crucial questions are these: How well has it worked
over the long sweep of American history ? How well
has it worked compared to the constitutions of other
democratic nations?
The only way to answer those questions is to study
American government closely- with specia l attention to its historical evoluti on and to the practices of
other nations. That is what this book is about. Of
course, even after close study, people will still disagree about whether our system should be changed .
People want different things and eva luate human
experience according to different beliefs. But if we
first understand how, in fact, the government works
an d why it has produced the policies it has, we can
then argue more intelligently about how best to
achieve our wants and give expression to our beliefs.

45

46

Chapter 2

*

Tile Constitution

SUMMARY

T

he Framers of the Constitution sought to create
a government capable of protecting both liberty
and order. The solution they chose- one without
precedent at that time-was a government that was
based on a written constitution that combined the
principles of popular consent. the separation of powers. and federalism.
Popular consent was embodied in the procedure
for choosing the House of Representatives but limited by the indirect election of senators and the electoral coll ege system for selecting the presiden t.
Political authority was to be shared by three branches of government in a manner deliberately intended
to produce conflict among these branches. This conflict. motivated by the self-interest of the people occupying each branch. wou ld. it was hoped. prevent
tyranny. even by a popular majority.

Federalism came to mean a system in which both
the national and state governments had independent
authority. Allocating powers between the two levels
of government and devising means to ensure that
neither large nor small states would dominate the
nationa l government required the most delicate
compromises at the Philadelphia convention. The
decision to do nothing about slavery was another
such compromise.
In the drafting of the Constitution and the struggle over its ratification in the states. the positions people took were ch iefly determined not by their
economic interests but by a variety of factors.
Among these were profound differences of opinion
over whether the state governments or the national
government would be the best protector of personal
liberty.

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?

1. W llat is tlie dilJercncc belweclI a delllocracy alld
a rcpublic?
A democracy means rule by the people; direct
democracy means letting every important issue be
decided by popular vote. A republic is a government
in which authority has been given to elected representatives. The United States is a republic in which
members of the House of Representatives are selected in democratic elections. members of the Senate

(at least initially) were selected by state legislatures.
and the courts are staffed by appointed judges.
2. What branch of gOVCrlllllellt has tile greatcst
power?
Initially. Congress had the most authority. As we
shall see in later chapters, the president and the federal courts grew in power. but even so Congress
remains the most important institution.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. Does tllc Constitution tell us what goals the govcrnlllcn t should scrve?
Not really. The preface tells us what the Founders
hoped the federal government would do. but that
preface has no legal authority. By and large. the
government has to set its own goa ls.
2.

W/lOSC freedolll

does the COl/stituLiol/ protcct?

It was intended to protect everybody 's freedom .

except that of slaves . To create a national government. it was necessary that the Constitution do

nothing about slavery, but without the Constitution.
there would have been no national government to
cha llenge slavery during the Civil War. Though
women are not mentioned. in fact there is nothing
in the Constitution to prevent them from holding
national office or from voting in federal elections.
Voting was to be decided by each state until the passage of a constitutional amendment (the ioeteenth. ratified in 1920) that prohibited the states
from denying the vote to women.

Summar!]

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES
To find historical and lega l documents:
FedLaw's constitutional a nd ea rly governm ent
docum ents: www.th ecre.com/fedlaw lIe ga I9.h tm
Teac hingAm erica nHistory.org
Nationa l Constitution Center:
w w w.constitu tioncen ter.org

Congress: thomas .loc .govl (choose Historica l
Documents)
To look at co urt cases about the Constitution:
Corn ell Un ivers ity:
supct.law.com e ll.e du/supct/index.html

SUGGESTED READINGS
Bailyn. Bernard . Tlte Ideological Origill.~ oj lite Al1Ierimll Revolutioll .
Ca mbrid ge: Ha r va rd University Press. 1 967. A br ill ian t
account of how the America n co loni sts formed a nd just ifi ed
th e idea of independen ce.
Becker. Carl L. Til e Declaratioll oj Independence. New York: Vinta ge.
1942. Th e class ic account of the mean in g of the Declaration .
Farra nd. Max . rite Frmllillg oj tile COllstitl/tion oj tlte Ullited States.
New Haven. Conn .: Ya le Un iversity Press. 191 3. A good. brier
acco unt of the Ph iladelphi a co nvention by th e editor of Macli so n 's notes on the convent ion .
Federalist papers. By Alexa nder Hamilton. Ja mes Mad ison. and
John Jay. Th e de fmiti ve edition . edited by Jacob E. Coo ke. was
published in Midd letown. Co nn .. in 1961. by th e Wes leya n
University Press.
Gold w in. Robert A .. and Wi ll iam A. Sc hambra . eds. How Capitalistic Is tlw COllstitl/tion ' Wa shin gton . D.C.: Am eri can Enterprise
fn stitute. 1982. Essays from different viewpoints discussin g
th e relation sh ip between th e Co nstitution and th e eco nomic
order.
- - -. How Dell lOcratic Is tile COIISlitl/tiOIl ? Wa shin gton . D. C.:
Ameri ca n En terprise fn stitute. ] 98 0. Coll ection of essays
offerin g different interpretation s of th e politica l mea nin g of
the Con stituti on .

Mc Dona ld. For rest. No vl/s Ordo Sec/orlll1l . Lawrence: University of
Kansas Press. 1985. A ca reful study of the int ellectual ori gi ns
o f the Constitution. Th e La tin titl e mea n s " New World Order."
wh ich is what th e Fram ers hoped t hey were crea tin g.
Robinso n. Don a ld L.. ed. HeJorminy AlIlerican Govemment . Bou lder.
Colo.: Westview Press. 1 98 5. Co llection of essays advocating
con stitutiona l reform .
Sheldo n. Garrett W. Til e Polit.iml Pll i/osap/I!I oJ Jam es Madi son Baltimo re: fohn s Hopkin s Unive rs ity Press. 200 1 . Masterfu l
acco unt of Madison's po litica l t bou gh t and it s roots in class ica l republi cani sm a nd Ch ristian ity.
Storin g. Herbert f. What the fln ti-Federalists Were For. Ch icago: [Jn iversity of Chi cago Press. 198 1. Close analysis of th e politica l
views of tbose opposed to the ra tifica tion of the Co nstitut"ion.
Wood. Gordon S. Tile Creatiol1 oJ tile A1I1erican HepulJlic. Ch apel Hill:
Uni versity of No rth Carolin a Press. ] 969. A deta il ed study of
Am erican po li tica l thou ght before th e Ph iladelphi a co nvention .
- - -. Tile HndicalislIl oj tile A111erica n Hevo/u tion. New York:
Knopf. ] 992. Magisteria l study of the nature a nd erfects or
th e Ameri ca n Revo luti on a nd the relati onship between th e
SOCia lly rad ica l l~evo lLLti on and tb e Co nstitution.

47

CHAPTER

3

Federalism

Governmental Structure
Federalism : Good or Bad? •
Political Activity

Federal-State Relations
Increased

The Founding
A Bold, New Plan •

Grants-in-Aid • Meeting National
Needs • The Intergovernmental Lobby
• Categorical Grants Versus Revenue
Sharing • Rivalry Among the States

Elastic Language

Federal Aid and Federal Control
The Debate on the Meaning of
Federalism
The Supreme Court Speaks •
Nullification • Dual Federalism •
State Sovereignty

Mandates •

Conditions of Aid

A Devolution Revolution?
Block Grants for Entitlements • What's
Driving Devolution?

Congress and Federalism

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

2.

Where is sovere ignty located in the
American polit ical syst em?
How is power divided between the
national governme nt and the states
under the Constitut ion ?

T

I

2.

Wh at competing values are at stake
in federali sm?
Who should decide what matters
ought to be governed mainly or
solely by national laws?

he average citizen wants more protection against terrorist attacks. The

~ajor targets for such attacks are probably to be found in big cities, major

sea ports, and important airports. But in our system of government, it is hard
to send money to only a few key locations. Just a few months after the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) was created, some governors complained
th at not enough DHS money was going to suburbs, small towns, and rural
areas.
This struggle is not new. Since th e adoption of the Constitution in 1787,
the sin gle most persistent so urce of political confli ct has been the relations
between the nation al and state govern ments. The poli tica l conflict over
slavery, [or exa mpl e, was intensified beca use some state governments condoned or supported slavery, while others took action to discourage it. The
proponents and opponents of slavery were thu s given territorial power centers from which to ca rryo n the di spu te. Other issues, such as the regulation
of business and th e prov ision of social welfare programs, were in large part
[ought out, [or well over a century, in terms of "national interests" versus
"states' ri ghts." While other nations, such as Great Britain, were debatin g
the question of whether the national government ought to proVid e old-age
pensions or regulate the railroads, the Uni ted States debated a different
question- whether the national governmen t had the right to do these
things. Even after these deba tes had ended- almost invariably with a decision favorable to the national government- the administration a nd financing of the progra ms that resulted have usu ally involved a large role for the
states.
Today an effort is under way to sca le back the size a nd activities of the
national government and to shift responsibility for a wide range of domestic
programs from Washin gton to the states. The effort to devolve onto the states
the national governmen t's functions in areas such as welfare, health care, and
job training ha s become known as devolution. In the 104th Congress
(1994- 1996) Republican majorities in the House and Senate made proposals, several of them enacted into law, to accelerate the devolution of nation al
power. Many of these proposa ls involved giving the states blod: gra ntsmoney from th e nation al governm ent for progra ms in certa in general areas
that the states ca n use at their discretion within broad guidelines set by Congress or responsible federal agencies.
In 1908 Woodrow Wilson observed th at how we structure the relationship
between the national government and the states "is the cardinal question of our
constitu tional system, " a question that can not be settled by "one generation,

49

50

Chapter 3

Federalism

because it is a question of growth. and every successive
stage of our political and economic development gives it
a new aspect. makes it a new question."l
Today, in the twenty-first century, is the America n
political system in the early stages of a "devolution revolution" that will make the states, not the national government. the dominant force in domestic affairs? Do
most Americans support devolution ? Have recent court
decisions returned power to the states? What. if any, dU~
ferences wUI devolution reforms mal<e in who governs
and to what ends? Before one can begin to address these
questions. it is importa nt to master the basic concepts
and understand the political history of federalism.

Governmental Structure
Federalism refers to a po li tical system in wh ich there
are loca l (territorial. regiona l. provincial, state, or
municipa l) units of government, as well as a nationa l govern ment. th at ca n make fina l decisions with
respect to at least so me governmenta l activities a nd
whose existence is specially protected. 2 Almost every
nation in the world has loca l units of government of
some kind, if for no other reason than to decentralize
the admini strative burdens o[ governin g. But these
governments are not federal unless the loca l units
exist ind ependent of th e preferences of th e national
government and ca n make decisions on at least some
matters without regard to those preferences.
The United States, Canada, Australia , India, Germany. and Switzerland are federal systems . as are a
few other nations. France, Great Britain. Italy. and
Sweden are not: they a re unitary systems, because
such local gover nmen ts as they possess can be
altered or even abolished by th e national government
and cannot plausibly claim to have final authority
over any significant governmental activities.
The special protection that su bnational governments enj oy in a federal system derives in part from
the constitution of the country but also from the
habits. preferences, and disposition s of th e citizens
The effort to transfer responsibility
for many public programs and services from
the federal government to the states.
bloci{ grants Money from the national government that states can spend within broad
guidelines determined by Washington .

devolution

and the actua l distribu tion of political power in society. The constitution of the former Soviet Union in
theory created a federal system. as claimed by that
co untry's full na me- th e Union of Soviet Socia list
Republics- but for most of their hi story, none of
these "socialist republics" were in the sli ghtest degree
independent of the centra l government. Were the
America n Co nstitution the only guarantee of the
independence of the America n states, they would
long sin ce have become mere administrative subunits
of the government in Washi ngton. Their independence results in large measure from the commitment
of Americans to the idea of local self-government and
[rom the fact that Congress consists of people who are
selected by and responsive to local constituencies.
"The basic political fact of federalism, " writes
David B. Truman. "is that it creates separate, selfsustaining centers of power. prestige, and profit. "3
Political power is locally acquired by people whose
careers depend for the most part on satisfying local
interests. As a result. though the national government has co me to have vast powers. it exercises
ma ny of those powers through state governments.
What ma ny of us forget when we thin k about "the
government in Wash ington " is that it spends much
of its money and enforces most of its rules not on
citize ns directly but on other. loca l units of government. A large part of the welfare system. a ll of the
interstate highway system. vir tua lly every aspect of
programs to improve citi es. the largest part of the
effort to supply jobs to th e unemployed. the entire
program to clean up our water. and even much of
our military manpower (in the form of the National
Guard) are enterprises in which the national government does not govern so much as it seeks, by regulation, grant. plan, argument. and cajolery. to get the
states to govern in acco rd ance with nationally
defined (though often vaguely defined) goa ls.
In France welfare. hi ghways, education. th e
police, and the use of land are all matters that are
directed nationally. In the United States hi ghways
and some welfare programs are largely state functions (th ough they make use of federal money) . while
education, policing. and land-use controls are primarily loca l (city. county. or specia l-district) functions.

Federalism: Good or Bad?
A measure of the importance of federalism is the
co ntroversy that surrounds it. To so me. federa lism
mea n s a ll ow in g states to block action. prevent

Governmental Structure
progress, upset national plans, protect powerful local
interests, and cater to the self-interest of hack politicians. Harold Laski, a British observer, described
American states as "parasitic and poisonous."4 and
William H. Riker, a n American po liti cal scientist.
argued that "the main effect of federalism since the
Civil War has been to perpetuate racism. "5 By contrast, another political scientist, Daniel J. Elazar,
a rgued that the "virtue of the federa l system li es in
its ability to develop and maintain mechan isms vital
to the perpetuation of the unique combination of
governmenta l strength . political flexibility. and individu a l liberty, which has been the central concern of
American po li tics."6
So diametrically opposed are the Riker and Elazar
views that one wonders whether they are talking
abou t the sa me su bj ect. They are, of course, but they
are stressin g different aspects of the same phenomenon . Whenever the opportunity to exercise political
power is Widely avai lable (as a mong the fifty states,
three thousand counties, and many thousands of
muniCipalities in the United States) . it is obvious that
in different places different people will make use of
that power for different purposes. There is no questio n that allowing states and cities to m ake
a utonomous, binding political decisions will a llow
some people in some places to make those decisions
in ways that maintain racial segregation. protect
vested interests, and facilitate corruption. It is equally true, however, that this arrangement also enables
other people in other places to pass laws that attack
segregation, regulate harmful economic practices,
a nd purify politics, often long before these ideas gain
national support or become national policy.
For example, in a unitary political system, such as
that of France, a sma ll but in tensely motivated group
could not have blocked civil rights legislation for as
lon g as some southern senators blocked it in this
country. But by the same token it would have been
equally difficult for another small but intensely motivated group to block plans to operate a nuclear
power plant in their neighborhood , as citizens have
done in this country but not in France.
The existence of independent state and local governments means that different pol itical gro ups pursuing different politica l purposes will come to power
in different places. The smaller the political unit, the
more likely it is to be dominated by a single politica l
faction. James Madison understood th is fa ct perfectly
a nd used it to argue (in Federalist No. 10) that it

Sovereignty, Federalism, and the
Constitution
Sovereignty means supreme or ultimate political
authority: A sovereign government is one that is
legally and politically independent of any other
government.
A unitary system is one in which sovereignty is
wholly in the hands of the national government,
so that the states and localities are dependent on
its will.
A confederation or confederal system is one in
which the states are sovereign and the national
government is allowed to do only that which the
states permit.
A federal system is one in which sovereignty is
shared, so that in some matters the national government is supreme and in other matters the
states are supreme.
The Founding Fathers often took confederal and
federal to me an much the same thing. Rather than
establishing a government in which there was a
clear division of sovereign authority between the
national and state governments, they saw themselves as creating a government that combined
some characteristics of a unitary regime with
some of a confederal one. Or, as Jam es Madison
expressed the idea in Federalist No. 39, the Constitution "is, in strictness, neither a national nor a
federal Constitution, but a composition of both."
Where sovereignty is located in this system is a
matter that the Founders did not clearly answer.
In this text, a federal regime is defined in the
simplest possible terms-as one in which local
units of government have a specially protected
existence and can make some final decisions over
some governmental activities.

would be in a large (or "extended") republic, such as
the United States as a whole. that one wo uld find the
greatest opportunity for all relevant interests to be
heard. When William Riker co ndemns federa lism, he
is thinking of the fact that in some places the ruling
factions in cities and states have opposed granting
eq ual rights to African Americans. When Daniel
Elazar praises federalism, he is recalling that, in other
states and cities, the ruling factions have taken the
lead (long in advance of the federal government) in
developing measures to protect the environment,

51

52

Chapter 3

Federalism
few elected officials, most of whom have the nation
as a whole ror a constituency. In short a rederal system, by virtue of the decentralization or a uthority,
lowers the cost of organized political activity; a unita ry system, because of the centralization or authority. raises the cost. We may disagree about the
purposes of organized political activity, but the ra ct of
widespread organized activity ca n scarcely be doubted-or if it can be doubted, it is only because you
have not yet read Chapters 8 a nd 11.
It is impossible to say whether the Founders, when
they wrote the Constitution, planned to produce
such widespread opportunities for political participation. Unrortu nately they were not very clea r (at least
in writing) abo ut how the federa l system was supposed to work, a nd thus most of the interesting questions about the jurisdiction and powers of our
national a nd state governments had to be settled by
a century and a ha lf of protracted. often bitter.
co nl'lict.

The Founding
Federalism has permitted experimentation. Women were ah/e to
vote in the Wyoming Territory in 1888, long before they collid
do so in most states.

extend civil rights. and improve social conditions. If
you live in Californi a, whether you like redera lism
depends in part on whether you like the ract that Calirornia has, independ ent or the rederal government,
cut property taxes. strictly co ntrolled coastal la nd
use. heavily regulated electric utilities, and increased
(at one time) a nd decreased (at another time) its welrare rolls.

Increased Political Activity
Federalism has many effects, but its most obvious
errect has been to facilitate the mobilization of politica l activity. Unlike Don Quixote. the average citizen
does not tilt at windmills. He or she is more likely to
become involved in organized political activity ir he
or she feels there is a reason able chance of having a
practical effect. The chances or having such a n efrect
are greater where there are many elected ofri cia ls
and independent governmental bodies. each with a
relatively small constituency, than where there are

The goa l or the Founders seems clear: federa lism was
one device whereby personal liberty was to be protected. (The separation of powers was another.) They
reared that placing final political authority in anyone
set of hands, even in the hands of persons popularly
elected, would so concentrate power as to risk tyranny. But they had seen what happened when independent states tried to form a compact, as under the
Articles of Co nfedera tion; what the states put together, they cou ld also take apart. The alliance among the
states that existed (rom 1776 to 1787 was a confederation: that is, a system of government in which the
people create state governments, which, in turn, create a nd operate a national government (see Figure
3.1). Since the national government in a confederation derives its powers from the states, it is dependent
on their continued cooperation for its survival. By
1786 that cooperation was barely forthcoming.

A Bold, New Plan
A federation-or a "federa l republic," as the
Founders called it- derives its powers directly from
the people, as do the state governments. As the
Founders envision ed it. both leve ls of government.
the national and the state, would have certain powers, but neither would have supreme authority over

The Fou nding

the other. Madison, writing in Federalist No. 46, said
that both the state and federa l governments "are in
fa ct but different agents and trustees of the people,
co nstituted with different powers." In Federalist No.
28 Hamilton explained how he thought the system
would work: The people co uld shift their support
between state a nd federal levels of government as
needed to keep the two in balance. "If their rights are
invaded by either. they can make use of the other as
the in strument of redress. "
It was an entirely new pla n, for which no historical precedent existed. Nobody ca me to the Philadelphia convention with a clear idea of what a federal
(as opposed to a unitary or a co n federa l) system
would look like. and there was not much discussion
at Phi ladelph ia of how the system wou ld work in
practice. Few delegates then used the word Jederalism
in the sense in which we n ow emp loy it (it was originally used as a synonym for confederation and on ly
later ca me to stand for something different). 7 The
Constitution does not spell out the powers that the
states are to have, and until the Tenth Amendment
was added at the insistence of various states, there
was not even a clause in it say ing (as did the amendment) that "the powers not delegated to the United
States by the Co nstitution, nor prohibited by it to the
states, are reserved to the states respectively, or to the
people." The Founders assumed from the outset that
the federal government would have only those powers given to it by the Constitution; th e Tenth Amendment was an afterthou ght, added to make tha t
assumption explicit and a ll ay fears that something
else was intended. 8
The Tenth Amendment has rarely had much practical significa nce, however. From time to time the
Supreme Court has tried to interpret that amendment
as putting certa in state activities beyond the reach of
the federal government, but invariab ly the Court ha s
later changed its mind and a llowed Washington to
regu late such matters as the hours that employees of
a city-owned mass-transit system may work. The
Court did not find that running such a transportation
system was one of the powers "reser ved to the
states."9 But, as we explain later in this chapter, the
Court has begun to give new life to the Tenth Amendment a nd the doctrin e of state sovereignty.

Elastic Language
The need to reconcile the competing interests of
large and sma ll states and of northern a nd southern

Figure 3.1

53

Lines of Power in Three Systems
of Government

UNITARY SYSTEM

Central government

Ci tizens
Power ce ntralized.
Stat e or regional govern ments derive authority from ce ntra l government.
Examples: United Kingdom, France .

FEDERAL SYSTEM

Stat e or loca l
government

Centra l govern ment

Citizens
Power divided between central and state or local governments .
Both the governm ent and constituent governments act di rectly
upon the ci ti zens.
Both must agree to constitutional change.
Examp les: Canada, United States since adoption of Constitution.

CON FEDERAL SYSTEM

(or CONFEDERATION)
Stat e or loca l

.6 government
1IIr - - Cen tral government
Citizens
Power held by independent states.
Centra l government is a creature of the const ituent governments.
Examp le: Un ited States under the Articles of Confederation.

states, especia lly as they affected the organization of
Congress, was sufficiently diffic ult without trying to
spell out exactly what relationship ought to ex ist
between the nationa l a nd state systems. For example.
Congress was given the power to regulate co mmerce

54

Chapter 3

Federalism

Th omas Jefferson (1743-1826) was not at the Constitutional
Convention. His dOllbts about the new national government led
him to oppose the Fedemlist administmtioll oj John Adam s and to
become an ardent champion oj states ' rights.
Ha mon g the severa l states. " The Phil adelphia convention would have gone on fo r four years rath er
than four month s if the Founders h ad dec id ed that it
was necessary to describe. in clea r la ngu age, how
one was to tell where commerce among the states
ended a nd commerce wh olly within a sin gle state
bega n. The Supreme Court. as we shall see. devoted
over a century to that task before givin g up.
Though some cl a uses bearin g on federal-state
relations were reasonably cl ear (see the box on pa ge
55). other clauses were qui te vague. The Founders
knew. correctly, th at they could not make an exact
and exh austive list of everythin g the federal government was empowered to do-circumstances would
cha nge. new exigencies would a ri se. Thus they added
th e followin g elastic la ngu age to Article I: Congress
sha ll have the power to Hma ke a ll laws whi ch sha ll be
necessary a nd pro per for ca rryin g into execution the
foregoin g powers."
The Fo und ers themse lves carri ed away from
Philadelphia differen t views of what federa lism
mea n t. On e view was championed by Ha mil to n.
Since th e peopl e had crea ted the nati ona l govern -

ment. since the laws a nd trea ties made pursuant to
the Constitution were "the supreme law of the land"
(Article VI). a nd since the most pressing needs were
the development of a national economy a nd the co ndu ct of foreign a ffa irs. Hamilton thou ght th at th e
nation al"government was the superior and leading
force in political affairs a nd that its powers ought to
be broadly defined a nd libera lly constru ed.
The oth er view. ch ampi oned by Jefferson , was
th at the federa l government, though important. was
the produ ct of a n agreement among the states: a nd
th ough "the people" were th e ul timate sovereigns.
th e principal threat to their liberties wa s likely to
come from th e national government. (Madison. a
strong supporter of nationa l supremacy at th e convention. later became a champion of states' rights.)
Thus the powers of the federa l governm ent should beJ
na rrowly construed and strictly limited. As Madison
put it in Federalist No. 45. in language th at probably
made Hamil ton win ce. "The powers delegated by the
pro posed Constitution to the federa l government are
few a nd defin ed. Those whi ch are to rema in in th e
State governments a re numerou s and indefinite. ,.
Ha milton a rgu ed for n ationa l supremacy. Jefferso n fo r states' rights. Though their differences were
grea ter in theory than in pra cti ce (as we shall see in
Cha pter 14. Jefferson while presiden t som etimes
acted in a positively Hamil tonia n ma nner). the differin g interpretations they offered of th e Co nstitution
were to shape politica l debate in this country until
well into the 1960s.

The Debate on the Meaning
of Federalism
The Civil War was fought. in part. over the issue of
national supremacy versus states' rights, but it settl ed only on e part of that a rgument- na mely, th at
the na tional governm ent was supreme. its sovereignty derived directly from th e peopl e, and thus the
states could not lawfully secede from th e Union . Virtu a lly every other aspect of th e nation a l-supremacy
issue continu ed to a nim ate politi ca l and lega l debate
for a nother century.

The Supreme Court Speaks
As arbiter of what th e Constitution mea ns. th e
Supreme Court became the foca l point of that debate.
In Chapter 1 6 we shall see in some detail how th e

Th e Debate on the Meaning of Federa lism

HOW THINGS WORK

The States and the Constitution
The Framers made some attempt to define the relations between the states and the federal government
and how the states were to relate to one another.
The following points were made in the original
Constitution-before the Bill of Rights was added .
Restrictions on Powers of the States
States may not make treaties with foreign nations,
coin money, issue paper currency, grant titles of
nobility, pass a bill of attainder or an ex post facto
law, or, without the consent of Congress, levy any
taxes on imports or exports, keep troops and ships
in time of peace, or enter into an agreement with
another state or with a foreign power.
[Art . I, sec. 10]
Guarantees by the Federal Government to the States
The national government guarantees to every state a
"republican form of government" and protection
against foreign invasion a.nd (provided the states
request it) protection against domestic insurrection.
[Art . IV, sec. 4]
An existing state will not be broken up into two or
more states or merged with all or part of another
state without that state's consent.
[Art. IV, sec. 3]

Court made its decisions. For now it is enough to
know that during the formative years of the new
Republic. the Supreme Court was led by a staunch
and brilliant advocate of Hamilton's position, Chief Ju stice John Marshall. In a series of decisions he and the
Court powerfully defended the national-supremacy
view of the newly formed federal government.
The most important decision was in a case, seemin gly trivial in its origins, that arose when James
McCulloch. the cashier of the Baltimore bran ch of the
Bank of the United States, which had been created by
Congress, refused to pay a tax levied on that bank by
the state of Maryland. He was hau led into state court
and convicted of failing to pay a tax. In 1819 McCu lloc h appea led all the way to the Supreme Court in a

Congress may admit new states into the Union .
[Art. IV, sec. 3]
Taxes levied by Congress must be uniform throughout the United States: they may not be levied on
some states but not others .
[Art. I, sec. 8]
The Constitution may not be amended to give states
unequal representation in the Senate .
[Art. V]
Rules Governing How States Deal with Each Other
"Full faith and credit" shall be given by each state to
the laws, records, and court decisions of other states.
(For example, a civil case settled in the courts of one
state cannot be retried in the courts of another.)
[Art. IV, sec. 1]
The citizens of each state shall have the "privileges
and immunities" of the citizens of every other state.
(No one is quite sure what this is supposed to mean.)
[Art. IV, sec. 2]
If a person charged with a crime by one state flees to
another, he or she is subjected to extradition-that
is, the governor of the state that finds the fugitive is
supposed to return the person to the governor of the
state that wants him or her.
[Art. IV, sec. 2]

case known as McCulloch v. Maryland. The Court, in a
una nimous opinion. answered two questions in ways
that expanded the powers of Congress and confirmed
the supremacy of the federal government in the exercise of those powers.
The first question was whether Congress had the
right to set up a bank, or a ny other corporation, since
such a right is nowhere explicitly mentioned in the
Constitution. Ma rshall sa id that. though the federal
government possessed only those powers enumerated in the Constitution, the "extent"-that is, the
meaning- of those powers required interpretation.
Though the word bank is not in that document. one
find s there the power to ma nage money: to lay a nd
collect taxes. iss ue a currency, and borrow funds. To

55

56

Chapter 3

Federalism

NEW

r

0 R Ie

Currency.

",,,,,,,,,,, ','''''' >::i- ::< ~ ::<i ~ ::<~ :/~::< ~43>#
One Q1.larter of a Dollar.
~;~ ~~ :':~.:':~<$>~~18>~

r
PrI"t ed LySl1l1l1/d lou,?p",

In

0

R

the Year

K:
M

oec

LXXVI.

At one time the states could issue their own paper monell, sllch as
this ew York cLirrencll worth twenty-five cents ill 1776. Under
the Co nstitution this power wns reserved to Co ngress.

carry out these powers Congress may reasonably
decide that cha rtering a national bank is "necessary
and proper." Marsha ll 's words were carefully chose n
to endow the "necessary and proper" clause w ith
the widest possible sweep:
Let the end be legitimate. let it be within t he
scope of the Constit ution, and all means which
are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to
that end, which are not prohibited. but cons istent w ith the letter a nd spirit of the Constitution, are constitutiona l. I 0
The second question was wh eth er a fed eral bank
could lawfully be taxed by a state. To a nswer it, Marsha ll went back to first principles. The government of
the United States was not established by the states.
but by the people. and thus the federal government
was supreme in the exercise of those powers conferred upon it. Having a lready concluded that chartering a bank was within the powers of Con gress,
Marshall then argued that the on ly way for su ch pow-

"necessary and proper" clause Section of the
Constitution allowing Congress to pass all laws
"necessary and proper" to its duties, and
which has permitted Congress to exercise powers not specifically given to it (enumerated) by
the Constitution .
nullification The doctrine that a state ca n
declare null and void a federal law that, in the
state's opinion, violates the Constitution .

ers to be sup reme was for th eir use to be immune [rom
state ch a llenge and [or the products of their use to be
protected against state destruction. Since "th e power
to tax involves the power to destroy. " and sin ce the
power to destroy a federa l agency would confer upon
the states using its supremacy over the federal government. the states m ay not tax any federal instrument. Hence the Maryland law was unconstitutiona l.
McCu lloch won, and so did the [ederal government.
Half a century later the Court decided that what was
sauce for the goose was sauce for the gander. It held
that just as state governments could not tax federal
bonds, the federal government could not tax the interest people earn on state and municipal bonds. In 1988
the Supreme Court ch anged its mind a nd decided that
Congress was now free. if it wished , to tax the interest
on such state a nd loca l bonds. l l Municipal bonds,
which for nearly a century were a tax-exempt investment protected. so their holders thought, by the Constitution, were now protected on ly by politics. So far
Congress hasn't wanted to tax them.

Nullification
The Supreme Court can decide a case without settling the issue. Th e stru ggle over states' rights vers us
national supremacy co ntinued to rage in Co ngress,
during presidential election s. and ultimately on the
battlefield. The issue ca me to center on the doctrine
of nullification. When Co ngress passed laws (in
1798 ) to punish newspaper editors who published
stor ies critical of th e federal governme nt, Jam es
Madison and Thomas Jefferson opposed the laws,
suggestin g (in statements known as th e Virgi nia and
Kentucky Resolutions) th at the states had the right
to "nullify" (that is. declare null and vo id) a federal
law that. in the states ' opinion , violated the Co nstitution. The laws expired before the claim of nullifica tion cou ld be settled in the courts.
Later the doctrine of nullification was revived by
John C. Ca lh oun of South Carolina. flIst in oppos ition to a tariff enacted by the federal governmen t and
la ter in opposition to federa l efforts to restrict slavery.
Calhoun argued that if Was hington attempted to
ban slavery, the states h ad the right to declare such
acts un constitutional and thus null and void . Thi s
time the iss ue was settled- by war. The northern victory in the Civil War determined once and for a ll that
the federal union is indisso lubl e and that states cannot declare acts of Congress unconstitutional. a view
later conllrmed by the Supreme Court.l 2

The De/JUte on tile Meaning of Federalism

Dual Federalism
After the Civil War the debate about the mea ning of
federa li sm focused on the interpretation of the commerce clause of the Constitution. Out of this debate
there emerged the doctrin e of dual federalism,
which held that though the national government
was supreme in its sphere, the states were equally
supreme in theirs , and that these two spheres of
action should and co uld be kept separate. Applied to
commerce the concept of du al federalism implied
that there were such things as interstate commerce.
which Congress could regulate, and intrastate commerce, which on ly the states could regulate, and that
the Court could tell which was which.
For a long period the Court tried to decide what
was interstate comm erce based on the kind of business that was bei ng conducted. Transporting things
between states was obViously interstate commerce,
a nd so subject to federal regulation. Thus federal
laws affecting the interstate shipment of lottery tickets, 13 prostitutes.14 Iiquor,15 and harmfu l food s a nd
drugs 1 6 were upheld. On the other hand, manufacturing. 17 insurance, 1R and farming 19 were in the
past co nsidered intrastate commerce, and so only the
state governments were allowed to regulate them.
Su ch product-based di stinctions turned out to be
hard to sustain. For examp le. if you ship a case of
whiskey from Kentucky to Kansas. how long is it in
interstate commerce (and thus subj ect to fed eral
law), and when does it enter intrastate commerce
and become subj ect only to state law ? For a while the
Court's answer was that the whi skey was in interstate commerce so long as it was in its "original package,"20 but that on ly precipitated long quarrels as to
what was the original package and how one is to
treat things. like gas and grain, that may not be
shipped in packages at all. And how could one distingui sh between manufacturing and transportation
when one company did both or when a single manufacturing corporation owned factories in different
states? And if an insurance company so ld policies to
customers both inside and outside a given state, were
there to be different laws regulating identical policies
that happened to be purchased from the same company by persons in different states?
dual federalism Doctrine holding that the
national government is supreme in its sphere,
the states are supreme in theirs, and the two
spheres should be kept separate.

The Terms of Local Governance
Legally a city is a municipal corporation or municipality that has been chartered by a state to exercise certain defined powers and provide certain
specific services. There are two kinds of charters:
special-act charters and general-act charters.
A special-act charter applies to a certain city
(for example, New York City) and lists what that
city can and can n ot do. A general-act charter
applies to a number of cities that fall within a certain classification, usually based on city population. Thus in some states all cities over 100,000
population will be governed on the basis of one
charter, while all cities between 50,000 and 99,999
population will be governed on the basis of a different one.
Under Dillon's rule the terms of these charters
are to be interpreted very narrowly. This rule
(named after a lawyer who wrote a book on the
subject in 1911) authorizes a municipality to exercise only those powers expressly given, implied
by, or essential to the accomplishment of its enumerated powers. This means, for example, that a
city cannot so much as operate a peanut stand at
the city zoo unless the state has specifically given
the city that power by law or charter.
A home-rule charter, now in effect in many
cities, reverses Dillon's rule and allows a city government to do anything that is not prohibited by
the charter or state law. Even under a home-rule
charter, however, city laws (called ordinances)
cannot be in conflict with state laws, and the
states can pass laws that preempt or interfere
with what home-rule cities want to do.
There are in this country more than 87,500
local governments, less than one-fourth (19,000)
of which are cities or municipalities. Counties
(3,000) are the largest territorial units between a
state and a city or town. Every state but Connecticut and Rhode Island has county governments .
(In Louisiana counties are called parishes, in
Alaska boroughs.)
There are more than 35,000 special-district
governments or authorities, which have responsibility for some single governmental functionhandling sewage treatment, managing airports,
or getting rid of mosquitoes , for example. School
districts (more than 13,500) are the most familiar
special-district governments. Often the voters
elect school board members, who then choose a
school superin te ndent.

57

58

Chapter 3

Federalism

In time the effort to find some clear principles that
distinguished interstate from intrastate commerce
was pretty much aba ndoned. Commerce was like a
stream fl ow ing thr ough th e co untry, drawing to itself
contribu tions from thousands of scattered enterpri ses a nd depos iting its produ cts in millions of individua l homes. The Court bega n to permit the federal
government to regul ate a lmost a nythin g th at a ffected this stream, so that by the 1940s not only had
fa rming a nd manufacturing been redefined as par t of
in terstate commerce, 21 but even the ja ni tors a nd
window washers in buildings th at housed companies
engaged in interstate commerce were now sa id to be
part of that strea m.22
Today lawyers are engaged in interstate commerce
but professiona l baseball players are not. If your state
has approved marijuana use for medical purposes, you
can still be penalized under federa l law even when the
marijuana you consume was grown in a small pot in
your backyard.23

State Sovereignty
It would be a mistake to think that the doctrine of
dua l federa lism is entirely dead. Until recently Co ngress, provided that it had a good reason. co uld pass
a law regul ating almost a ny kind of economic activity a nywhere in the country, a nd the Supreme Co urt
wo uld ca ll it constitu tiona l. But in United States v.
Lopez (1995) the Co urt held that Co ngress had
exceeded its commerce cl ause power by prohibiting
guns in a school zone.
The Court reaffirmed the view that the commerce
cla use does not justify a ny federal action when , in
May 2000 , it over turned the Violence Aga inst
Women Act of 1994. This law allowed women who
were th e victims of a crime of violence motivated by
gender to sue th e gu ilty party in federa l court. In
United States v. Morrison the Court, in a five-to-four
decision, sa id that attacks aga inst women are not,
and do not substantia lly affect, interstate commerce,
a nd hence Congress cannot co nstitutionally pass
such a law. Chief Justice Will ia m Rehnquist said that
"the Constitution requires a distinction between
what is truly nationa l a nd what is truly local. " The
states, of co urse, can pass such laws, and ma ny have.
The Court has moved to strengthen states' rights on
other grounds as well. In Prin tz v. United States (1997)
the Court invalidated a federal law that required local
police to conduct background checks on aLi gun pur-

ch asers. The Court ruled that the law violated the
Tenth Amendment by comma nding state govern ments to carry out a federal regulatory program. Writing for the f1 ve-to-four majority, Ju stice Antonin Sca lia
declared, "The Federa l government may neither issue
directives requiring the states to address particular
problems, nor command the states' officers, or those of
their poli tica l subdivisions. to administer or enforce a
Federa l regulatory progra m .... Such comma nds are
fu nda menta lly incompatible wi th our co nstitutiona l
system of dual sovereignty. "
The Court has also given new life to the Eleventh
Amendment. which protects states from lawsuits by
citizens of other sta tes or foreign nations. In 199 9
the Co urt shielded states from suits by copyright
owners who claimed infringement from state agencies a nd immunized states from lawsuits by people
who a rgued that state regulations create unfair economic competi tion. In Alden v. Maine (1999) the
Co urt held th at state employees co uld not sue to force
state complia nce with federal fa ir- labor laws. In the
Court's five-to-four majority opini on. Justice Anthony M. Kennedy stated, '~ltho ug h the Constituti on
grants broa d powers to Co ngress, our federali sm
requires th at Con gress treat the states in a mann er
consistent with their sta tus as residuar y sovereigns
a nd joint pa rticipa nts in the govern a nce of the
n ation." A few years later, in Federal Maritime Commissioll v. So uth Carolina Ports Authority (2002), the
Co urt fu rther expanded states' sovereign immunity
from private lawsui ts. Wri ting for the fi ve-to-four
majority, Ju stice Clarence Thomas declared th at du a l
sove reignty "is a definin g feature of our nati on's constitutional blueprint," adding that the states "did not
co nsent to beco me mere appendages of the federal
government" when they ratified the Constitution.
Not a ll rece nt Co ur t decisions. however, support
greater state sovereignty. In 1999 , fo r example, the
Court ruled seven to two that state welfare programs
may not restri ct new residents to the welfare benefi ts
they wou ld have received in the states from which
they moved. In addition. each of the Court's m ajor
prostate sovereignty decisions has been decided by a
tenuous fi ve-to-four margin . Mo re generally. to
empowe r states is not to di sempower Co ngress,
which, as it has done since the late 19 30s. ca n still
ma ke federa l laws on a lmost anythin g as long as it
does not go too far in "co mma nd eering" state
resources or guttin g states' ri ghts.

The Debate on the Meaning of Federalism
New debates over state sovereignty ca ll forth old
truths about the constitutional basis of state and
local government. In general a state can do anything
that is not prohibited by the Constitution or preempted by federa l po li cy and that is consistent with its
own constitution. One generally recognized state
power is the police power, which refers to those
laws and regulations, not otherwise unconstitutional, that promote hea lth, safety, and mora ls. Thus the
states can enact and enforce crimina l codes, require
children to attend school and citizens to be vaccinated, and restrict (subject to many limitations) the
availab il ity of pornographic materials or the activities of prostitu tes and drug dealers.
As a practical matter the most important activities
of state and local governments involve public education, law enforcement a nd criminal justice, health
and hospita ls, roads and h ighways, public welfare,
and control over the use of public land and water
supplies. On these and many other matters, state
constitutions tend to be far more deta iled than the
federa l Constitution, and to embody a mo re expansive view of both governmental responsib ilities and
individua l rights than it does. For instance, California 's lengthy state constitution includes an explicit
right to "privacy," specifies that "non-citizens have
the same property rights as citizens," directs the
state's legislature to use "all suitable means" to support pub lic education, and contains language governing pub lic housing for low-income citizens. Many
state constitutions contain kindred provisions. In
part for this reason, state courts are now believed by
some to be on the who le more progressive in their
holdings on abortion rights (authorizing fewer
restrictions on minors), welfare payments (permitting fewer limits on eligibility), employment discrimination (prohibiting discrimination based on sexu al
preference) , and many other matters than federal
courts generally are.
As we saw in Chapter 2, the federa l Constitution is
based on a republican, not a democratic, principle:
laws are to be made by the representatives of citizens,
not by the citizens directly. But many state constitutions open one or more of three doors to direct
democracy. About half of the states provide for some
form of legislation by initiative. The initiative allows
voters to place legislative measures (and sometimes
constitutiona l amendments) directly on the ba llot by
getting enough signatures (usua lly between 5 and
15 percent of those who voted in the last election) on

a petition. About half of the states permit the refere ndum , a proced ure that enab les voters to reject a

measure adopted by the legislature. Sometimes the
state constitution specifies that certain kinds of legislation (I'or example. tax increases) must be subject to
a referend um whether the leg islature wishes it or
not. The recall is a procedure, in effect in over twenty states, whereby voters can remove an elected official from office. If' enough signatures are gathered on
a petition, the official must go before voters, who can
vote to leave the person in office, remove the person
from office, or remove the person and replace him or
her with someone else.
The existence of the states is gu aranteed by the
federal Constitution: no state can be div ided without
its consent, each state must have two representatives
in the Senate (the on ly provision of the Constitution
that may not be amended), every state is assured of a
repub lican form of government, and the powers n ot
granted to Congress are reserved for the states. By
contrast, cities, towns, and counties enjoy no such
protection; they exist at the pleasure of the states.
Indeed, states have frequent ly abo lished certain
kinds of local governments, such as independent
schoo l districts. Without exception the lega l terms of
loca l governance (see the box on page 57) are determined by the states.
This explains why there is no debate about city sovereignty comparable to the debate about state sovereignty. The constitutional division of power between
them is settled: the state is supreme. But federal-state
relations can be complicated, because the Constitution
invites elected leaders to struggle over sovereignty.
Which level of government has the ultimate power to
decide where nuclear waste gets stored, how much.welfare beneficiaries are paid, what rights prisoners enj oy,
or whether supersonic jets can land at local airports?
American federalism answers such questions, bu t on a
case-by-case basis through intergovernmental politics
and court decisions.
police power State power to enact laws promoting health, safety, and morals.
initiative Process that permits voters to put
legislative measures directly on the ballot.
referendum Procedure enabling voters to
reject a measure passed by the legislature.
recall Procedure whereby voters can remove
an elected official from office.

59

60

Chapter 3

Federalism

~ Federal-State Relations
Though co nstitu tion a lly the federa l government
may be supreme, politica lly it mu st take into account
th e fact that the laws it passes have to be approved by
members of Congress se lected from , a nd responsive
to, state a nd loca l co nstituencies. Thu s what Wa shington lawfully may do is not the sa me thing as what
it poli tica lly may wish to do. For exa mple, in 1947
the Supreme Court decided that the federal government a nd not the states had supreme authority over
oil beneath the ocean off the nation's coasts.24 Six
yea rs later, after an intense debate. Congress passed
a nd the presiden t signed a law transferring title to
these tideland oil reserves back to the states.

Grants-in-Aid
The best illustration of how politica l realities modify
lega l a uthority can be found in federal grants-ina id. The first of these programs began even before the
Constitution was adopted , in the form of land grants
made by the national government to the states in
order to fin ance education. (State universities all over
the coun try were buil t with the proceeds from the sale
of these la nd gran ts; hence the na me land-grant colleges.) La nd gra nts were also made to support the
buildin g of wagon roads. ca nals, ra ilroads. a nd fl oodcontrol projects. These measures were hotly debated
in Congress (President Madiso n thought some were
un constitu tion al). even though the use to which the
gra nts were put was left almost entirely to the states.
Cas h gra nts-in-aid began almost as early. In 180 8
Congress gave $200,000 to the states to pay for their
militias, with the states in ch arge of the size, deployment, a nd command of these troops . However,
grant-in-aid programs remained few in number and
small in price until the twentieth century, when
scores of new ones came into being. In 1915 less
tha n $6 million was spent per year in grants-in-aid:
by 1925 over $ 11 4 million was spent: by 19 37 the
fi gure was nearly $300 million. 2S But the greatest
growth bega n in the 1960s a nd has continued
alm ost unabated ever sin ce. Betwee n 19 60 a nd

grants-in-aid

Money given by the national
government to the states.

SOlne of the nation's greatest universities, such as the
Universit!J of Califo rnia at Los Angeles, began as landgra nt colleges.

1975 , tota l federal grants to the sta tes and localities
in creased eightfo ld. By 1985 they amounted to over
$ 100 bi ll ion a year, and by 2003 they had risen to
about $400 billion a year and provided state and
local governments with roughly a fifth of their annual bud gets. Tod ay, federal grants go to hundreds of
progra ms, including such gia nt federal-state progra ms as Medicaid.26
The gra ntS-in-aid system, once under way, grew
rapidly because it helped state and local officials
resolve a di lemma. On the one ha nd they wanted
access to the superior taxing powe of the federa l
government. On the other ha nd prevailing constitutiona l interpretation , at least until the late 19 30s.
held that the federal government could not spend
money for purposes not authorized by the Constitution . The so lu tion was obviously to have federa l

Federal-State Relations

money put into state hands: Washington would pay
the bills; the states wou ld run the programs.
Federal money seemed, to state officia ls, so attractive for four reasons. First, the money was there.
Thanks to the high-tariff policies of the Republicans,
in the 1880s Was hington had huge budget surpluses. Second, in the 1920s, as those surp luses dwindled , Washington inaugurated the federal income
tax. It automatically brought in more money as economic activity (and thus persona l income) grew.
Third , the federal government, unlike the states.
managed the currency and could print more at will.
(Tech n ically. it borrowed this money, but it was
under no obligation to pay it all back, because, as a
practical matter, it had borrowed from itself.) States
cou ld not do this: if they borrowed money (and many
cou ld not), they had to pay it back. in full.
These three economic reasons for the attractiveness of federa l grants were probably not as important
as a four th reason: politics. Federal money seemed to
a state offi cia l to be "free" money. Governors did not
have to propose. collect. or take responsibility for federa l taxes. Instead, a governor could denounce the
federa l government for being profligate in its use of
the people's money. Meanwhi le he or she could claim
credit for a new public works or other proj ect funded
by Washington and, until recent decades, expect little or no fed eral supervision in the bargain. 27
That every state had a n incentive to ask for federa l money to pay for local programs meant, of course,
that it would be very difficult for one state to get
money for a given program without every state's getting it. rrhe senator from Alabama who votes for the
project to improve nav igation on the Tombigbee will
have to vote in favor of projects improving navigation on every other r iver in the country if the senator
expects his or her Senate colleagues to support such
a request. Federalism as practiced in the United
States means that when Washington wants to send
money to one state or congressiona l district. it must
send money to ma ny states a nd districts.
Shortly after September 11, 2001, for example.
President George W. Bus h and cong ressional leaders
in both parties pledged new federal funds to increase
public safety payrolls, purchase the latest eq uipment
to detect bioterror attacks, and so on. Since then
New Yo rk City and other big cities have received tens
of millions of federal dollars for su ch purposes, but so
have scores of smaller cities and towns. In 2003 a nd

61

The terrorist threat has enhanced Ilationallaw enforcement, such
as this truck operated by tile Secret Service.

2004 the grants allocated by the Department of
Homeland Security were based on so-called Cairshare formulas mandated by Con gress, which are
baSically the same formu las the federal government
llses to allocate certain highway and other funds
a mong the states. These funding formul as not only
spread money around but generally skew funding
toward states and cities with low populations. Thus
in 2003 Wyoming received seven times as much federal homeland security funding ger capita as New
York State did , and Grand Forks Co unty. North
Dakota (population 70,000) . received $1.5 million
to purchase biochemical suits, a semia rmored van.
decontamination tents, an d other equ ipment to dea l
with weapons of mass destruction. 2 8

Meeting National Needs
Until the 1960s most federal grants-in-aid were conceived by or in cooperation w ith the states and were
designed to serve essentially state purposes. La rge
blocs of voters and a variety of organized interests
would press for grants to help farmers, build highways. or support vocational education. During the
] 960s, however, an important change occurred: the
federal government began dev ising grant programs
based less on what states were demanding and more
on what federal officials perceived to be important
nationaL needs (see Figure 3.2). Federa l onkia ls, not
state and local ones. were the principal proponents of
gra nt programs to aid the urban poor. combat crime,
reduce po llution, and deal with drug abuse. Some of

62

Chapter 3

Figure 3.2

Federalism

The Changing Purpose of Federal
Grants to State and Local Governments

ments in creased in the 1990s and reached new hi ghs
after 2000 (see Figure 3.3).

T he Intergovernmental Lobby

1960
Edu cat ion and
Miscellaneous 9%
Transportation
and highways

43%
security

38%

2003
Tran sportat ion
and highways

ll%~

Income

Miscellaneous 9%

training 13%

Note: Totals may not add up to 100 percent because of rounding .
Source: Budget of the U.S. Government, Fiscal Year 2005,
table 12 .2.

these programs even attempted to bypass the states,
providing money directly to cities or even to local citizen groups. These were worrisome developments for
governors, who were accustomed to bein g the conduit for money on its way from Washington to local
communities.
The rise in federal activism in setting goa ls and the
efforts, on occasion, to bypass state officials occurred
at a time when the total amount of federal a id to states
and localities had become so vast that many jurisdictions were completely dependent on it for the support
of vital services. Whereas federal aid amounted to less
than 2 percent of state and local spending in 1927, by
1980 it amounted to 26 percent, and total aid to state
and local governments was 15.4 percent of the federal budget. After stabilizing a nd dipping slightly in the
1980s. Washington's grants to state and local govern-

State a nd loca l officials, both elected and appoin ted .
began to form an important new lobby-th e "intergovernm enta l lobby, " made up of mayors, govern ors.
superintendents of schools, state directors of public
health, county highway commi ssion ers. local police
chiefs, and others who had come to count on federal
fund s. 29 Today, fed eral agencies responsible for
health care, criminal justice. enviro nmental protection , a nd other progra ms have people on staff who
speci a lize in providing information. technical assistance, and fina ncial support to state and loca l orga nizations, including the "Big 7": the U.S. Co nference of
Mayors; the Nationa l Governors Associatio n: th e
Natio nal Associa tion of Co unti es; the Na tion a l
League of Cities; the Council of State Governments;
the International City/County Management Association; and the National Conference of State Legislatures. Reports by these groups and publications like
Governing magazine are read routinely by ma ny federal officials to keep a handl e on issues and trend s in
state and local government.
National organizations of governors or mayors
press for more federal money, but not for increased
funding for a ny particular ci ty or state. Thus most
states, dozens of counties, a nd over one hundred
cities have their own offices in Washington, D.C.
Some are sma ll, some share staff with other jurisdictions. but a few are quite la rge a nd boast several
dozen full- time employees. Back home. state and
local governments have created new positi ons, or
redefined old ones, in response to new or cha nged
federal funding opportunities. For exa mple, in 2001.
after the U.S. Conference of Mayors endorsed President George W. Bush's plan to increase federal fund ing for local community-serv ing orga nizations. over
a hundred mayors hired or designated someone on
their staff (such as a deputy mayor) to work with the
new White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives and its centers in severa l federal
departments.
The purpose of the intergovernm ental lobby has
been the same as that of any private lobby- to obta in
more federal money with fewer strings attached. For a
while the cities and states did in fact get more money.
but since the early 1980s their success in gettin g federal grants h as been more checkered.

63

Federal-State Relations

Figure 3.3

Federal Grants to State and Local Governments, 1984-2004

Total federal grants to state and local governments, in billi ons
of constant 1996 dollars, and t he ai d as a percentage of
total federal spe ndi ng on all grants, for eac h fi scal year.

_

Total grants (sca le at left)
Perce ntage of fed eral spe ndi ng

420

r--

400
~

380
360

r--

340
320
300

r--

280

r--

260
~

240

~

...-

220

~

~

~

200

~

180

r--

160
140

~

~

~

r--

r--

.--

~

r--

120
100
80
60
40
20

1' 0-"
q
0
....

0-"

N

....
....

~~
....
.... "ci....
0-"

q

0-"
ci

0-"
0>
cri

<D

....

0-"
ci
<Xl

....

o
1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

0-"

<D

........

....
,
1992

.

~

"....
""

0>
N

..
1991

0-"

0-"

,-

1993

0-"
<Xl
.<f
....

0-"
q
....

I:

I'

1994

1995

0-"
<D
.<f

....

0-"

'"

q
....

0-"

0-"
0>
.<f
....

"....Lei

0-"

0>

Lei

....

....0-"
"....

>.e
0

0-"

0-"

"....

~

"....

L

j

I

...
1996

1997

1998

0

0>

1O

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Note: Data f or t he year 2004 is estimated.
Source. Budget of the U.S. Government, Fiscal Year 2002 , Historical Tab les, t able 6 .1, and Budget of t he U.S. Govern ment, Fisca l Yea r 2005,
t able 12. 1.

Categorical Grants *rsus
Revenue Sharing
Th e effort to loosen the strings took the form of shifting, as much as possible, the federal aid from categorica l grants to block gra n ts or to revenu e
sharing. A categorical gra nt is one for a specific purpose deflned by federal law: to build an air port or a
college dormitory, for example. or to ma ke welfare
paymen ts to low-income mothers. Such grants usually require that the state or locality put up money to
"match" some par t of the federal grant, though the
amount of matching funds can be quite small. (In
the federal high way program Was hington pays
about 90 percent of the construction costs and the
states only about 10 percent.) Governors and mayors
complained about these categorica l gra nts beca use
their purposes were often so narrow that it was

impossible for a state to adapt federal grants to local
needs. A mayor seeking federal money to build parks
migh t have discovered that the city could get money
only if it la unched an urban-renewal program that
entailed bulldozing several blocks of housing or
small businesses.
One response to this problem was to consolidate
several categorical or project grant programs in to a
single block grant devoted to some general purpose
and with fewer restrictions on its use. Block grants
(sometimes called special revenue sharing or broad-based

cate gorical grants

Federal grants for specific
purposes, such as build ing an airport.
revenue sharing Federal sharing of a f ixed
percentage of its revenue with t he st ates.

2004

64

Chapter 3

Federalism

The Federnl Department of Housing alld Urban Development
works witl! state housing authorities to create affordable places
to live, such as this new mixed-in come community ill Atlanta.
aicQ began in the mid-1960s, when such a grant was
created in the health field . Though many block grants
were proposed between 1966 and 1980, only five
were enacted. Of the three largest, one consolidated
various categorical grant programs aimed at cities
(Community Development Block Grants), another created a program to aid local law enforcement (Law
Enforcement Assistance Act), and a third authorized
new kinds of locally managed programs for the unemployed (CETA, or the Comprehensive Employment and
Training Act). Between 1980 and 1995 the number of
block grants in effect rose from five to sixteen.
Revenue sharing (sometimes called ge/1eral revenue
sharing, or GRS) was even more permissive. Adopted
in 1 972 with the passage of the State a nd Local Fiscal Assistance Act. GRS provided for the distribution
of about $6 billion a year in federal funds to states
and localities, with no requirement as to matching
fund s and freedom to speno the money on almost
any governmenta l purpose. Distributi on of the
money was determined by a statistica l fo rmula that
took into account popul ation , loca l tax effort. and
the wealth of the state in a way intended to send
more money to poorer, heavily taxed states and less
to richer, li ghtly taxed ones. In 1986 the program
was ended after having distributed about $85 billion
over a fourteen-year period.
In theory block grants and revenue sharing were
supposed to give the states and cities consid erable
freedom in deciding how to spend the money while
helping to relieve their tax burdens. To some extent
they did. However. neither the goal of "no strings"

nor the one of fiscal relief was rea lly atta ined. First,
the amount of money avai lable from block grants
and revenue sharing did not grow as fast as the states
had hoped nor as quickly as did the money ava il ab le
through categorical grants. Second, the federa l government steadily increased the number of strings
attached to the spending of this supposed ly "unrestricted" money. Thus in the mid-1990s the number
of federal grants to state and local governments
increased from 599 to 633. The entire growth was in
categorica l grants (from 578 to (18); no new block
grants were established. From 2001 through 2003,
the Bush administration sought to create new block
grants for low-income housing, preschool education,
and other programs. but by then most governors
were coping with steep decli nes in state government
revenues. In 2004 the drop in state government revenues. combined with federal efforts to ratchet down
state and local domestic spending. led many states to
cut or freeze even Widely popular children'S health
and other state programs.
Block grants grew more slowly than categorical
grants because of the different kinds of politica l
coalitions supporting each. Congress and the federal
bureaucracy liked categorical gra nts for the same
reason the states disliked them- the specificity of
these programs enhanced federal control over how
the money was to be used . Federa l officials, joined by
liberal interest groups and organized labor. tended to
distrust state governments. Whenever Congress
wanted to address some national problem, its natural
inclin atio n was to create a categorical grant program
so that it. and not the states, would decide how the
money would be spent.
Moreover, even though governors and mayors like
block grants and revenue sharing, these programs
cover such a broad range of activities that no single
interest group has a vita l stake in pressing for their
en largement. Revenue sh aring, for example. provided a little money to many city agencies but rarely
provided all or even most of the money for any single
agency. Thus no single agency acted as if the expansion of revenue sharing were a life-and-d eath matter.
Categorica l grants. on the other band, are often a
matter of life a nd death for many agenci es-state
departments of we lfare, of highways. and of health,
for exampl e. are utterly dependent on federal aid.
Accord ingly. the administrators in charge of these
programs will press strenuously for their expansion.
Moreover, categorica l programs a re supervised by

Federa l-State Helations

65

special committees of Congress, and as we shall see
in Chapter l3 , many of these committees have an
interest in seeing their programs grow.

Rivalry Among the States
The more important that federal money becomes to
the states, the more likely they are to compete among
themselves for the largest share of it. For a century or
better the growth of the United States- in population, business, and income- was concentrated in the
industrial Northeast. In recent decades, however,
that growth- at least in population and employment, if not in income- has shifted to the South,
Southwest, and Far West. This change has precipitated an intense debate over whether the federal government, by the way it distributes its funds and
awards its contracts, is unfairly helping some regions
and states at the expense of others. Journalists and
politicians have dubbed the struggle as one between
Snowbelt (or Frostbelt) and Sunbelt states.
Whether in fact there is anything worth arguing
about is far from clear: the federal government has
had great difficulty in figuring out where it ultimately spends what funds for what purposes. For example,
a $1 billion defense contract may go to a company
with headquarters in California, but much of the
money may actually be spent in Connecticut or New
York, as the prime contractor in California buys fi"om
subcontractors in the other states. It is even less clear
whether federal funds actually affect the growth rate
of the regions. The uncertainty about the facts has
not prevented a debate about the issue, however. That
debate focuses on the formulas written into federal
laws by which block grants are allocated. These formulas take into account such factors as a county's or
city's population, personal income in the area, and
housing quality. A slight change in a formula can
shift millions of dollars in grants in ways that favor
either the older, declining cities of the Northeast or
the newer, sti ll-growing cities of the Southwest.
With the advent of grants based on distributional
formulas (as opposed to grants for a particular project), the results of the census, taken every ten years,
assume monumental importance. A city or state
shown to be losing population may, as a result, forfeit
millions of dollars in federal aid. There are over one
hundred programs (out of over five hundred federal
grant programs in all) that distribute money on the
basis of population. When the director of the census
in 1960 announced figures showing that many big

Th e federal government helps shape tile character of cities by giving Inoney to build parts of the federal highway systelll.

cities had lost population, he was generally ignored.
When he made the same announcement in 1980.
after the explosion in federal grants, he was roundly
denounced by the mayors of those cities.
Senators and representatives now have access to
computers that can tell them instantly the effect on
their states and districts of even minor changes in a
formula by which federal aid is distributed. These formulas rely on objective measures, but the exact measure is selected with an eye to its political consequences.
There is nothing wrong with this in principle, since
any political system must provide some benel1ts for
everybody if it is to stay together. Given the competition among states in a federal system, however, the
struggle over allocation formulas becomes especially
acute. The results are sometimes plausible, as when
Congress decides to distribute money intended to help

66

Chapter 3

Federalism

disadvantaged local school systems in large part on
the basis of the proportion of poor children in each
school district. But sometimes the results are a bit
strange, as when the formula by which federal a id for
mass transit is determined gives ew York, a city utterly dependent on mass transit, a federal subsidy of two
cents per transit passenger but gives Grand Rapids, a
city that relies chieny on the a utomobile, a subsidy of
forty-five cents per passenger.30

Federal Aid and Federal
Control
So important ha s federal aid become for state and
local governments that mayors and governors, a long
with others, began to fear that Washington was well
on its way to controlling other levels of government.
"He who pays the piper calls the tune." they muttered. In this view the constitutional protection of
state government to be found in the Tenth Amendment was in jeopardy as a resu lt of the strings being
attached to the grants-in-aid on which the states
were increas ingly dependent.
Block grants and revenue sharing were efforts to
reverse thi s trend by a llowing the states and loca lities
freedom (considerable in the case of block gra nts;
almost unlimited in the case of revenue sharing) to
spend mon ey as they wished. But as we have seen ,
these new devices did not in fact reverse the trend .
Categorica l grants- those with strings attachedcontinued to grow even faster.
There are two kinds of federa l controls on state
governmental activities. The traditional control tell s
the state government what it mu st do if it wants to get
some grant money. These strings are often called conditions of aid. The newer form of control tells the
state government what it must do, period . These rules
are ca ll ed mandates. Most mandates have little or
nothin g to do with federal aid- they apply to a ll state
governments whether or not they accept grants.

conditions of aid Terms set by the national
government that states must meet if they are
to receive certain federal funds .
mandates Terms set by the national government that states must meet whether or not
they accept federal grants .

Mandates
Most ma ndates concern civil rights and environmenta l protection . States may not discriminate in the
operation of their programs, no matter who pays for
them. Initia lly the antid iscrimination rules app lied
chieny to di stinctions based on race, sex, age, a nd
ethni city, but of late they have been broadened to
include physical and mental di sabilities as well . Various pollution control laws require the states to comply with fed era l sta nd a rds for clean air. pure drinking
water. and sewage treatmen t. 3 1
Stated in general terms , these mandates seem reasonable enough. It is hard to imagin e anyone arguing that state governments sho uld be free to
discriminate again st peopl e because of their race or
nationa l origin. In practice. however. some ma ndates
create administrative and financial problems, especially when the mandates are written in vague language. thereby givin g federa l administrative agencies
the power to decid e for themselves what state a nd
loca l governments are supposed to do.
In 1980 there were thirty-six mand ates affecting
state a nd loca l governments, twenty-two of them
enacted in th e 1970s. Both the Reagan administration an d th e admin istration of Bush the eld er
opposed the growth of mandates. Neverthe less,
between 1981 and 1986 some 140 reg ulations, representing nea rly six thousand new requirements on
state and loca l government. were ad ded to eighteen
existing ma nd ates. Over th e last two decades, Congress has passed several dozen addi tional mandates.
All ma nd ates are not created eq ua l. Some mandates take the form of regulatory statutes and
a mendments that expand on prev ious legislation;
the 19 82 Voting Ri ghts Act Amendments were based
on federa l civil rights laws dating back to the 1960s.
Other mandates represent new areas of federa l
involvement. For exa mple, the 1986 Handicapped
Children's Protection Act introduced fed era l regulations intended to improve the life prospects of disabled yo un gs ter s. So me mandates a re easy to
understand, simpl e to admini ster, a nd relatively
inexpensive- for examp le, the 1988 Ocean Dumping Ban Act. which prohibits any additional dumping of muni cipal sewage slu dge in ocean waters.
However, many mandates are hard to interpret, difficult to admini ster. and have hi gh or uncerta in costs.
The 1990 Americans with Disab ili ties Act (ADA),
which required busin esses and state and local gov-

Fe deral Aid and Federal Control
ern ments to provide the disabled with eq ual access to
serv ices, employment, buildings, a nd transportation
systems, was one of twenty mandates signed into
law by President Bush the elder in ] 990. Unfortunately, the ADA was enacted with no clear-cut definition of "equal access," no unambiguous blueprint of
how it was to be administered , and no reliab le estimates of how much it would cost to implement.
Mandates are not the only way in which the federal government imposes costs on state a nd local governments. Certain federal tax and regulatory policies
make it difficult or expensive fo r state and local governments to raise revenues, borrow funds, or privatize public functions. Other federal laws expose state
and loca l governments to financial liability, and
numerous fed eral court decisions and administrative
regulations require state and loca l governments to do
or not do various thin gs , either by statute or through
an implied constitutiona l obligation.32
[t is clear that the federal courts have helped fuel
the growth of mandates. As interpreted in this century by the U.S. Supreme Court, the Tenth Amendment provides state an d loca l offi cials no protection
against the march of mandates. Indeed, many of the
more controversial mandates res ult not from congressiona l action but from court decis ions. For example, many state prison systems have bee n, at one time
or another, under the control of federal judges who
req uired major changes in prison constru ction and
management in order to meet standards the judges
derived from their reading of the Constitu tion.
School-desegregation plans are of course the bestknown example of federa l mandates. Those involving busing- an unpopular policy- have ty pica lly
been the result of co urt orders rather than of federal
law or regul ation.
Judges-usually, but not always, in federal
co urts-ordered Massachusetts to change the way it
hires fire fighters, required Philadelphia to institute
new procedures to handle complaints of police bruta lity, and altered the locatio n in which Chicago was
planning to build hous ing proj ects. Note that in most
of these cases nobody in Wash ington was placing a
mandate on a local government; rather a local citizen was using the federal courts to change a loca l
practice.
The Supreme Court has made it much easier of
late for citizens to contro l the behavior of local officials. A federal law, passed in th e 1870s to protect
newly freed slaves, makes it pos:;ible for a citizen to

sue any state or local official wh o deprives that citizen of any "rights, privileges, or immunities secured
by the Constitution and laws" of the United States. In
1980 the Court decided that this law permitted a citizen to sue a loca l official if the official deprived the
citizen of allY thing to which the citizen was entitled
under federal law (and not just those federal laws
protecting civil rights). For example, a citizen can
now use the federal courts to obtain from a state welfare oflke a payment to which he or she may be entitled under federa l law. 0 one yet knows how this
development wi ll affect the way loca l government
operates.

Conditions of Aid
By far the most important federal restrictions on
state action are the conditions attached to the grants
the states receive. In theory accepting these conditions is voluntary-if you don't want the strings.
don't take the money. But when the typical state
depends for a quarter or more of its budget on federal grants, many of which it has received for years and
on which many of its citizens depend for their livelihood s, it is not cl ear exactly how "voluntary" such
acceptance is. During the 1960s some strings were
added, the most important of which had to do with
civil rights. But beginning in the 19 70s the number
of conditions began to proliferate and have expanded
in each subsequent decade down to the present.
Some conditions are specifi c to particular programs, but most are not. For instance, if a state
builds something w ith fed eral money, it must first
conduct an environmenta l impact study, it must pay
construction workers the "prevailing wage" in the
area , it often must prov ide an oppor tunity for citizen
participation in some aspects of the design or location of the project, and it must ensure that the
contractors who build the proj ect have nondiscriminatory hiring policies.
The states and the federal government. not surprisingly, disagree about the costs and benefits of
such rules. Members of Congress and federa l officials
feel they have an obligation to deve lop uniform
national policies with respect to important matters
and to prevent states and cities from misspending
federal tax dollars. State officials. on the other hand.
feel these national rules fail to take into account
diverse local conditions, require the states to do
things that the states must then pay for, and create
serious inefficiencies.

67

68

Chapter 3

Federalism

The National Guard, a state-rull activity, IlOt only sellds troops to
cOli/bat but hands out ell/ergellcy supplies, as here ill .Florida after
a hurricalle in 2004.

What state and local officials discovered, in short.
was that "free" federal money was not quite free after
all . In the 1960s federal aid seemed to be entirely
beneficial; what mayor or governor would not want
such money ? But just as local officials found it attractive to do things that another level of government
then paid for, in time federal officials learned the
same thing. Passing laws to meet the concerns of
national constituencies- leaving the cities and states
to pay the bills and manage the problems- began to
seem attractive to Congress.
Because they face different demands, federal and
loca l officials find themselves in a bargaining situation in which each side is trying to get some ben efit
(so lving a problem, satisfying a pressure group)
while passing on to the other side most of the costs
(taxes, administrative problems).
The bargains struck in this process used to favor
the local officials, because members of Congress
were essentially servants of local interests: they were
elected by local political parties, they were part of
local political organizations, and they supported
local autonomy. Beginning in the 1960s, however.
changes in American politics that will be described in
later chapters-especially the weakening of political
parties, the growth of public-interest lobbies in

Washington, and the increased activism of the
courts- shifted the orientation of many in Congress
toward favoring Washington's needs over loca l
needs.
In 1981 President Reagan tried to reverse this
trend. He asked Congress to consolidate eighty-three
categorical grants into six large block grants. The
Reagan-era c utbacks in the amount of federal
money, and the threat of more to come, led many
governors and mayors to find new ways of delivering
old services. Many cities turned over trash collection
and other tasks to private firms, often realizing financia l savings. Many states experimented with ways of
inducing welfare recipients to take jobs, thereby saving on welfare payments. During the prosperous
1980s the cutback in federal aid was made easier to
bear because the economy brought in more tax
money to the states without their having to raise new
taxes. In tough times, such as the early 1990s, the
states struggled to make ends meet. By the mid1990s, however, the economy was back on track,
and the effort begun by the Reagan administration to
devolve federal power to the states got a powerful
new push by the 104th Congress.

A Devolution Revolution?
With the election of Republican majorities in the
House and Senate in 1994, a renewed effort was led by
Congress to shill important functions back to the
states. The key rtrst issue was welfare- that is, Aid to
Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) . Since
1935 there had been a federal guarantee of cash assistance to states that offered support to low-income,
unmarried mothers and their children. AFDC had
become bitterly controversial as the number of women
using it and the proportion of births out of wedlock
rose dramatically. President Clinton vetoed the ftrst
two bills to cut it back but signed the third. It ended
any federal guarantee of support and, subject to certain rules, turned the management of the program
entirely over to the states, aided by federal block
grants. The rules said that every aided woman should
begin working within two years and no woman could
receive benefits for more than five years.
These and other Republican initiatives were part
of a new effort ca lled devolution, which aimed to
pass on to the states many federal functions. It is an
old idea but one that acquired new vitality because

A Devolution Hevolutiol1?
Congress, rather than the president, was leading the
effort. Traditionally members of Congress liked voting for federal programs and categorica l grants: that
way members could take cred it for what tbey were
doing [or particular constituencies. Under its new
conservative leadership, Congress, and especially the
House, was looking for ways to scale back the size
and activities of the national government. Even Clinton seemed to agree when. in his 1996 State of the
Uni on address. he said that the era of big national
government was over. But whatever politicians say,
no one really knows how best to divide the responsibility between Washington and the states.

Block Grants for Entitlements
Consider what bappened with block grants. Basically,
there are three types oJ block grants: operational
grants, for purposes such as running state child-care
programs: capital grallts, for purposes such as building
local wastewater treatment pl ants; and entitlement
grants, for transferring income to families a nd individuals. From 1966 to 1994 a total of twenty-three
block grants were enacted, and fifteen were still in
place when the 104th Congress ca me to power. But
all of these block grants, including all nin e of the Reagan-era block grants, were for operating a nd capital
purposes: none were for major entitlement programs.
The federal government's two biggest grant-in-aid
programs- the now defunct AFDC, often referred to
simply as "welfare," which provided cas b assistance
to the poor, a nd Medicaid, which finan ces tbe majority of medical a nd long-term care services for lowincome a nd disabl ed adults and children-were not
created as block grant programs. Together AFDC a nd
Medicaid accounted for half of all federa l grant-in-aid
spending. Botb AFDC and Medica id were operated as
entitlement programs. Each state was entitled to federal dollars for AFDC and Medica id based on the
amount of money it paid to poor famili es and individuals. In turn eacb state determined the level a nd
range of benefits eli gible individuals received. within
a framework defined by federal laws a nd regulations.
RepUblicans in the 104th Cong ress made a flurry
of proposals for making both AFDC and Medicaid into
block grant programs, as well as federa l job training,
vocational education , employment, childcare. foster
care, school nutrition, and food programs. All told
these proposals, had they been enacted, would have
increased federal bl ock grants to about $183 billion

and catapulted the amount of block gra nt funds in
income-transfer programs from only 4 percent to
nearly 79 percent.
In the end the devo lution revolutionaries of tbe
l04th Congress did not succeed in turning Medicaid
into a block grant program. But they did succeed
with AFDC and a number of related progra ms. And
they did put the devolution of Medicaid and other
importa nt federal programs squarely on the national
political agenda, possibly to stay.
Tbere is also some early evidence that the devolution of federa l welfa re programs has triggered
second-order devolution. a flow of power and
responsibility from the states to local governments,
and third-order devolution. the increased role of
nonprofit organ izations and private groups in policy
implementation. For example, until the 1996 federal
welfare reform law took effect, few states administered their wel fare systems in close working pa rtnerships with city or co unty governments. By 2000,
however, fifteen states, including two of the biggest
(California and New York), were usin g so-called
county-administered systems. Subject to state direction, scores of local governments are now deS ignin g
and administering welfare progra ms (job placement,
job training, childcare, and others) through forprofi t firms and a wide variety of nonprofit organ izatio ns, including loca l religious congregatio ns. For
exam ple, a 2004 study found that in some big citi es
over a quarter of welfare-to-work programs were
bein g administered through public-private partnerships that included various local community-based
organizations as grantees.33
From 1996, when federal welfare reform law took
effect, to 2002, when the law received its required fiveyear renewal, th e nation's welfare caseload declined by
57 percent to just over 2 milli on families. 34 Observers
disagree about how much the devolution of welfare
policy (independent of good economic times and other
factors) h ad to do witb these drops. But one thing is
clear: with fewer people on welfare rolls receiving cash
assistance. states amassed billions of dollars in
unspent federal welfare funds. In the late 1990s, these
so-called welfare surpluses, together with booming
economic conditions in many places, permitted most
states to increase spending. But the good times were
short-lived. By 2002, growth in state Medicaid costs
fueled in part by new federal laws malting the program
more generous a nd covering more people, a shortfall

69

70

Chapter 3

Figure 3.4

Federalism

Dealing w ith Deficits

Key fi sca l developments by number
of st ates, as of January 2002:
Revenues below
projections

46

Expenditures
over budget

30

Bu dget cu ts
or hold backs
Use of reserves

39

26

Other mea sures to
balan ce t he budget

30

Source: From " Dea ling With Deficit ," Council of State

Govern ments, National Conference of State Legislatures, as
reported in Governing, May 2002, p. 22. Reprinted wi th
perm ission.

in revenues states were projected to receive in tobaccosettlement payments from big cigarette companies
(the payments were keyed to the companies' sales.
wh ich have been falling) , and a sudden surge in funding for state police and other post- September 11
homeland security measures, among other factors.
found most states dealing with budget deficits and
raiding fiscal reserves (see Figure 3.4).

What's Driving Devolution?
The drive for devolution has complex roots. but three
forces stand ou t: the beliefs of devolution's proponents, the realities of deficit politics. and the views of
most citizens. Accord ing to R. Kent Weaver. the
House Republicans who spearheaded the devolution
effort harbored a "deep-seated ideological mistrust of
the federal government reinforced by the belief that
governments closer to the people were more responsive to popular sentiment. and more likely to constrain the growth of programs that were wasteful
and redistributive."3 5 At the same time. by 1994
ma ny governors of both parties were convinced that
the time had come to let state capita ls take the lead in
figuring out how best to address social problems and
administer public health and welfare programs.
But deficit politics also played a role. Congressional
Republicans sought not only to fund entitlement pro-

grams with block grants instead of categorical grants
but also to make major cuts in entitlement spending.
For exa mple. one of their bills wou ld have reduced
Medicaid spending by $163 billion and various welfare entitlements by $175 billion over seven years.
Ma ny Americans favor devolution. at least in theory. But it remains unclear how deep public sentiment in favor of devolution runs when "shifting
responsibility to the states" also means cutting specific program benefits. For example, when asked in
1995 which federal progra ms "should be cut back in
order to red uce the federa l budget dellcit. " most
Americans opposed cuts in Medica id (7 3 percent).
environmenta l spending (67 percent), unemployment insurance (64 percent). and many other progra ms. The one main exception was AFDC (only 35
percent opposed cuttin g it). 36 In 2004. amid proj ections by the Congressiona l Budget Office that the
year's federa l deficit would reach over $440 billion,
an all-time high. and total some $2. 3 trillion over the
next decade. polls still found little mass support for
cutting Social Security benefits or specific social progra ms to aid the old or disabled, and both major presidential candidates endorsed poliCies that betokened
greater future domestic and defense spending.

1.

Congress and Federalism

Just as it remains to be seen whether the Supreme
Court will continue to revive the doctrine of state sovereignty. so it is not yet clear whether the devolution
movement wi ll ga in momentum , stall, or be reversed.
But whatever the movement's rate. the United States
will not become a wholly centralized nation. There
remains more political and policy diversity in America than one is likely to Hnd in any other large industrialized nation. The reason is not only that state and
local governments h ave retained certain constitutional protections but also that members of Congress continue to think of themselves as the representatives or
loca lities to Washington a nd not as the representatives of Washington to the localities. As we shall see in
Ch apter 13. American politics, even at the national
level. remains local in its orientation.
But if this is true, why do these same members of
Congress pass laws that create so many problems for.
and stimulate so many complaints rrom. mayors and

Out-of-Towner with Twins
to Sue State for Failin to
Fund Abortion
g

January 4

PIERRE, SO

An abortion rights rou
.
dolIar federa l lawsui7 a p has fJ/ed a mu/timilIion_
Department of Hun1a S galnst the South Dakota
n ervlces Th
.
bh

MEMORANDUM
To: Judge Grace Viola
From: Robert George, law clerk
Subject: State abortion-funding policies
As requested, I have researched state
abortion-funding policies. The main
finding is that the laws vary greatly.
The first question before you is
whether to accept the case for
review.

On e alf of a wel~a d
. e SUIt is brought
h
"re- ependent M '
w a was denied public fu d'
mnesota woman
Mmnesota, public fundi!1 for
n 109 fo
'
.r an abOrtlOn.
In
adu!t welfare recipients; alI abortIOns IS available to
but In South Dakota I't I'S '1 or most CIICUmstances
aval able ., .
,
en dangerment. Th e woman I . OlllY 111 cases of/'~
lLe
was not endangered, the b c aImed that while her life
" d'
me IcalIy necessary" ba ortlOn th at she sought was
been diagnosed as sUfferinec~se she had previously
drome. Agency doctors d' g om chromc fatigue synprocedure. While in the s;;;greed and denied her the
II1to premature labor and g e sbeekll1g Work, she went
ave mh to twins . ..

Arguments for:
1. Three states provide public financing for abortion only in cases
of life endangerment. Sixteen states provide it in all or most circumstances.
2. About two hundred thousand women nationwide receive government-funded
abortions each year.
3. Advocates argue that just as the federal courts have narrowed state discretion in
domains such as state prisoners' appeal rights, the courts should set and enforce
national standards for women's abortion rights. Who gets what should not depend
on who lives where .
Arguments against:
1. Twenty-six states provide public financing for abortions only in cases of rape,
incest, or life endangerment. Only five provide it under those and other health
circumstances.
2. About 85 percent of all abortions are privately funded, and federal courts have
consistently upheld the right of states to restrict abortions and withhold public
funding.
3. Opponents argue that just as the Supreme Court has begun to restore state
sovereignty and revive the Eleventh Amendment, it would be a mistake, especially
on such a morally controversial issue as abortion, to prevent the citizens of each
state from setting and enforcing policies that are in accord with their preferences.
Who gets what should sometimes depend on who lives where .
Your decision :
Accept case _ _ __
Reject case _ _ __

Chapter 3

72

Federalism

governors? One reaso n is that members of Congress
represent different co nsLituencies from the sa me
loca lities. For example, one member of Co ngress
from Los Angeles may think of the city as a collection
of business people, homeowners. and taxpayers,
while a nother may think of it as a group or African
Americans, Hispa ni cs, and nature lovers. II' Washington wants to simply send money to Los Angeles.
these two representatives co uld be expected to vote
together. But if Washin gton wants to impose ma ndates or restrictions on the city, they mi ght very well
vote on opposite sides, each voting as his or her constitu ents would most likely prefer.
Another reason is that the organizations that once
linked members of Congress to local groups have eroded. As we shall see in Chapter 9, the political parties,
which once allowed many localities to speal<: with a single voice in Washington, have decayed to the point
where most members of Congress now operate as free
agents, judging local needs and national moods independently. In the 19 60s these needs and moods seemed
to req uire creatin g new gra nt programs; in the 1970s
they seemed to require voting for new mandates; in the
1980s and 1990s they seemed to req uire letting the
cities and states alone to experim ent with new ways of
meeting their needs; a nd today some say they req uire
rethinkin g devolution before it goes "too r~lr."
There are exceptions. In some states the parties
continue to be strong. to dominate decision-makin g
in the state legislatures, and to significa ntly affect the
way their co ngressional delegations behave. Democratic members of Co ngress from Chicago, for example, typically have a common background in party
politics and share at least some alleg iance to important party leaders.

*
S

But these exceptions are becoming fewer and
fewer. As a result, when so mebody tries to speak
"for" a city or state in Washingto n. that perso n has
li ttle claim to any rea l a uthority. The mayo r of
Philadelphia may fa vor one progra m, the governor of
Pennsy lvan ia may favor another, and individual
loca l a nd state officia ls- school superintendents. the
insurance commiss ioner, public hea lth administrators- may favor still others. In biddin g for fed eral
a id . those parts of the state or city that are bestorganized often do the best. and increas ingly the
best-orga nized groups are not the political parties
but rather specialized occupational gro ups such as
doctors or schoolteachers. If one is to ask, therefore.
why a member of Congress does not li sten to his or
her state anymore. the answer is. "What do you
mean by the state? Which official, which occupational group, which party leader speaks for the state?"
Fin a lly. Americans differ in the extent to which we
like federal as opposed to loca l decisions. When people are asked which level of govern ment gives them
the most for their money, relatively poor citizens are .
li kely to mention the federa l government [lfSt, whereas relatively well-to-do citizens a re more likely to
menti on loca l government. If we add to income other
meas ures of socia l di vers ity- race. re li gion. and
reg ion- th ere emerge even sharper differences of
opini on about whi ch level of government works best.
It is thi s soc ia l diversity, and the fact that it is represented not only by state a nd local leaders but also by
members of Con gress, that keeps federalism alive
and makes it so important. Americans simply do not
agree on eno ugh things. or even on which level of
government ought to decide on those things. to make
possible a unitary system .

SUMMARY

tates participate actively both in determining
nationa l policy and in admin istering nationa l
programs. Moreover. they reserve to themselves or
the loca lities within them importa nt powers over
public serv ices. such as schoolin g an d law enforcement. and public decisions. such as la nd -use contro l,
that in unitary systems are dominated by the nationa l governm ent.
Debates about federalism are as old as the republi c
itself. After the Civ il War, the doctrin e of dual feder-

alism emerged, which held that though the national
government was supreme in its sphere, the states
were eq ually supreme in theirs. For most of the twentieth ce ntury. however, cha nges in publi c law and
court decisions favored national over state power.
After the 19 60s states beca me increasingly dependent on Washington to fund ma ny activities and programs. Today, however, there is once aga in a lively
debate about the limits of national power, how closely
the federa l government ought to regu late its grants to

Summary
states, and the wisdom of devolving ever more federal
responsibilities onto state and local governments.
Evaluating federalism is difficult. On the one
hand. there is the sordid history of states' rights and
legalized racism. On the other hand , there is the open
opportunity for political participation afforded by
today's fifty states and thousands of local govern-

ments. Naturally, federalism permits laws and policies on important public matters to vary from state to
state and town to town. But how much, if at a ll , they
should vary on given matters, and who should
decide, are questions that every generation of Americans must answer anew.

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?

1. Where is sovereignty located in the AlI1ericall
political system?
Strictly speaking, the answer is "nowhere. " Sovereignty means supreme or ultimate political authority. A sovereign government is one that is legally and
politically independent of any other government. No
government in America. including the national government headquartered in Washington, D.C., meets
that definition. In the American political system, federal and state governments share sovereignty in
complicated and ever-changing ways. Both constitutional tradition (the doctrine of dual sovereignty)
and everyday politicking (fights over federal grants.
mandates, and conditions of aid) render the national
government supreme in some matters (nationa l

defense. for example) and the states supreme in others (education. for instance).

2. How is power divided between the natiOlial goverIHllent and the states under tile Co nstitution?
Early in American history. loca l governments and
the states had most of it. [n the twentieth century.
the nationa l government gained power. In the last
two decades the states have won back some of their
power because of Supreme Court decisions and legislative efforts to devolve certain federal programs to
the states. But the distribution of power between the
national government and the states is never as simple or as settled as it may appear to be.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. What competing values are at stake infederalisln?
Basica lly two: equality versus participation. Federa lism means that citizens living in different parts of
the country will be treated differently, not only in
spend ing programs. such as welfare, but in legal systems that assign in different places different penalties to similar offenses or that differentially enforce
civil rights laws. But federalism also means that
there are more opportunities for participation in
making decisions-in influencing what is taught in
the schoo ls and in deciding where highways and
government projects are to be built. Indeed , differences in public policy- that is, unequal treatmentare in large part the result of participation in
decision-making. It is difficult. perhaps impossible.
to have more of one of these values without having
less of the other.

2. Who should decide what matters ought to be govemed mainly or solely by natiollal laws?
In practice, the federal courts have often been the main
or llnal arbiters of federalism. As we shall see in Chapter 6. it was the U.S. Supreme Court that decided to outlaw state and local laws that kept children in racially
segregated public schools. Constitutional amendments
initiated by members of Congress have also been used
to apply legally enforceable national standards to matters once left to state or local governments. Examples
would include the Twenty-sixth Amendment. which
gave eighteen-year-old citizens the right to vote. Not
surprisingly. when state and local ofllcials have been
permitted to decide, they have usually favored national
laws or standards when it served their political interests
or desire for "free" money. but decried them as "intrusive" or worse when they have not.

73

74

Chapter 3

Federali sm

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

State news: www.stateline.org
Council of State Governments: www.csg.org
ational Governors' Association: www.nga .org

Supreme Court decisions:
www.nndlaw.com/casecode/supreme.html

SUGGESTED READINGS
Beer. Sa muel I-I. To Make a Natioll: TI/ c Hcdi scover./f oJ Alll eri(,(111 FederalislII. Ca mbridge: Ha rvard Uni versity Press. 1993. The defin itive study of the ph ilosop hica l bases of America n fed eralism.
Conlan. Ti mothy. Frolll New /-'ederali slI/ to Devo /I/ti ol/. Wash in gton.
D. C. : Brook in gs In stituti on . 1991l. A ma sterful over v iew of t he
poli ti cs of federa li sm from Rich a rd Nixo n to Bi ll Clinton.
Derthick. Ma rtha N. Keepillg tile COll/polllld I~ epllblic. Washin gton.
D.C.: Brookings In stituti on. 200 ]. A masterfu l ana lysis of trends
in American federa lism from the Fou nd ing to the present.
Diamond . Marli n. "The Federal ist's View of Federa lism." In Essaus
ill Fedem/islI/. edited by George C.S. Benson . Claremont. Ca lif'. :
In stitute for Stud ies in Federa lism of Claremont Men's College.
196 1. 2 1- 64. A profound ana lysis of what the Poun ders mea nt
by federalism.

Grodzins. Morton . Til e AII/erimll SUSiell 1. Chi cago: Ra nd Mc Na lly.
19 66 . Argues that America n federa lism h as a lways in volved
exten sive sh a rin g of functions between na ti o na l and state
governments.
Melni ck. R. Shep. Bet wei'll Ole Lilies: Illte rpretillg Weljilre Higil ts.
Was hin gton. D. C. : Broo kin gs In stit.ution. 1994. An examin ation of how trends in sta tutory interpretation h ave a ffected
broader policy developm ents. in clud in g the ex pa nsion of the
agenda of natio na l governm ent. th e persisten ce of divided government. a nd th e res urgence a nd decentra liza tion of Congress.
Ri ker. Wi lli a m H. /-'edemlislI/: Origill. Operatiol1. Siglli[ICII l/ce. Boston :
Littl e. Brown. 1964. A cla ss ic expl a n a tion a nd criti cal analysis
of federa li sm here a nd abroad.

CHAPTER

4

American Political Culture

Political Culture
The Political System •

The Economic System

Comparing America with Other Nations
The Political System • The Economic System •
The Civic Role of Religion • Religion and Politics

The Sources of Political Culture
The Culture War

Mistrust of Government
Political Efficacy
Political Tolerance

WHO GOVERNS?
1.
2.

TO WHAT ENOS?

Do Americans trust their
government?
Why do we accept great d ifferences
in wealth and income?

I

~
.

.

1.

Why does our government behave
differently than governments in
countries with similar constitutions?

f you have lived in Argentina. Brazil. Mexico. or the Philippines, you

might wonder why these countries, whose constitutions are very much
like the American one. have had so much trouble with corruption, military
takeovers, and the rise of demagogues. All of these nations have had periods of democratic rule, but only for rather shor t periods of time. If these
n ations have a n elected pres iden t, a sepa rately elected congress, and an
independent judiciary, a nd if all promise perso na l freedom to their people,
why do they have so mu ch troub le?
This is an old problem. Alexis de Tocqueville, the perceptive French
observer of American politics, noticed this as early as the 183 0s. One reason a democratic republi c took root in the United States but not in other
countries th at copied its constitution was that this country offered more
abundant and fertile so il in which the roots could grow. 1 The vast territory
of the United States created innumerable opportunities for peop le to acquire
land and make a living. No feuda l aristocracy monopolized the land , the
government imposed only minimal taxes, and few lega l restraints existed.
As one place after a nother fi lled up, people kept pushing west to find new
o. pportunities. A nation of small, independent farmers, unlike the traditional European one of land less peasa nts and indentured serva nts, could make
democracy work.
But other nations that were similarly favored did not achieve the same
resu lt. As Tocqueville n oted, much of South America contains fertile land
a nd rich reso urces, but democracy has not fl ourished there. 2 Had he
returned to th e United States fifty years later, when the frontier was no
longer expanding a nd Americans were crowd ing into big cities, he would
have found that democratic government was still more or less intact.
The Constitution and the physica l advantages of the land cannot by
themselves explain the persistence of the nation's democratic institutions.
In addi tion we mu st consider the customs of the people- what Tocquevill e
called their "moral and intellectual characteristics"3 a nd what modern
social scientists call our political culture.

~

Political Culture

If yo u travel abroad. yo u will quickly become aware that other people often
behave differently from Americans. Spaniards may eat di nner at 10:00 P.M. ,
whereas Americans eat at 6:00 or 7:00 P.M. Italians may close their shops

76

d ) \ I (-j ~

r-

Hy

\

-:::::.-

ec~u
\

.A"

/}

Political Culture

77

o both systems. For exa mple, America ns think it
very importa nt that every body should be equal politica lly, but they do not think it important tha t everybody should be equa l economica lly. By co ntrast,
peop le in some other nations beli eve that th e prin ciple of equa lity should be applied to both eco nomic
an d poli tica l li fe .

The Political System
There are at least five impor ta nt elements in th e
American view of the poli tical system:

3) .

Alexis de Tocq l/eville (J 805-1859) was a !}Ollllg French
aristocrat wl/O cnl/1e to the Un ited States to study the
Alllericnll prison s!}stell/. He wrote tile brilliant
Democracy in America (2 vols. , 1835- 1840), a profO l/lld allalysis of our political cultl/ re.

for three hours in the middle of the day, while American shops are open co ntinuously from 9: 00 to 5:00.
Germa ns address people more forma lly th a n America ns, using last na mes when we would use first
names. Japa nese business executives attach a lot of
importance to working together as a group, while
their America n counterparts often are more individua listic. In these a nd countless other ways we ca n
obser ve cultural differences among peopl e.
Such differences are not limi ted to eating, shopkee pin g. or manners. They incl ude differences in
politi ca l cul ture as well . A political culture is a distin ctive and pattern ed way of thinkin g..about how
political a nd economi c Iile ought to be ca rried out.
Be liefs about economi c life a re part of th e politica l
culture beca use poli tics a ffects eco nomi cs.
America ns do not judge their politi ca l and economic systems in the same way. As we sha ll see, thi s
difference ma kes them somewh at uniq ue, for in
ma ny other nations people apply the same stand a rd s

s)

Liberty: Americans a re preoccupied with their
rights . They believe they should be free to do pretty much as they please, with some exceptions, so
long as they don 't hurt other people.
Equality: Americans believe everybody should
have an equal vote and an equa l chance to participate and succeed.
Democracy: America ns think government offi cials
should be acco untabLe..to the peopl e.
Civic duty: Americans genera lly feel people ought
to take communi ty a ffairs seriously a nd help 0lJ.1.
when they ca n. 4
Tlldiv idua l respolISibility: A characteristica lly America n view is that. ba rring so me disability, individu a ls a re res ponsibl e for their own acti o22§. a nd
well-bein g. --

By vast majorities Americans believe th at every
citizen should have an equa l cha nce to influence government policy a nd to hold public office. a nd they
oppose the idea of letti ng peopl e have titles such as
"Lord " or "Duke," as in England . By somewhat sma ller majorities they beli eve that people should be
allowed to vote even if they can't read or write or vote
intelligently. 5 Though Americans recognize that people differ in their abilities, they overwhelmingly agree
with the statement th at "teaching children that all
people are rea lly equal recognizes that all people are
equa lly worthy a nd deserve equa l treatment. "6
At least three questions can be raised about this
poli tica l cultu re. First. how do we know that the
America n peopl e sha re t11ese beliefs? For most of our
history there were no publi c opini on polls, a nd even
after they beca me co mmonplace. they were rather
crude too ls for measuring the existence and meaning
political culture

A coherent way of thinking
about how politics and government ought to
be carried out.

S Q5

78

Chapter 4

Americal1 Political Culture

At the height oj imllligratioll to this country there was a strikillg
elllphasis on creatillg a shared political culture. Schoolchildren.
whatever their Ilatiollal origin, were taught to salute this
country's flag.

of complex. abstract ideas. There is in fact no way to
prove that values such as those listed above are
important to Americans. But neith er is there good
reason for dismissing the list out of hand . One can
infer. as have many schola rs. the ex istence of certain
values by a close study of the kinds of-~ me ri­
cans read, the ~eec hes they hear. tb e slDga ns~to
which they respond. a~ tbe political choicesJ hey
make. as well as by noting tbe obser vations of
insigbtful foreign visitors. Personality tests as well as
opinion poll s. particul arly those asking similar questions in different countries, also supply useful eviden ce. so me of which will be reviewed in th e
follo wing paragraphs.
Second . if these va lues are important to Americans. how can we expl ain the existence in our society
of behavior that is obviously inconsistent with them?
For example. if white Americans believe in equality of
opportunity. why did so many of them for so long
deny that equality to African Americans? That people
ct contra
ssed beliefs is an ev~
fact of life: people believe in honesty, yet tbey steal
from their employers a nd sometimes under report
their taxable income. Besides values. self-interest and
social circumstances also shape behavior. Gunnar
Myrd al. a Swedish observer of America n society.
described race relations in this country as "an American dilemm a ,. resultin g from tbe co nflict between the
'l\ merica n creed" (a belief in equali ty of opportunity)
and America n behav ior (denying Afri can Ameri cans
full citizenship).! But the creed remains important
because it is a so urce of change: as more a nd more

people become aware of the inconsistency between
their va lues and their behav ior. that behavior slowly
changes. s Race relations in this country would take
a very different co urse U' in stead of an abstract but
widespread belief in equality there were an equally
widespread belief tb at on e race is inherently inferior
to anotber. (No doubt some Americans believe that,
but most do not. )
Third. if there is agreement among Americans on
certain political values. why has there been so much
political conflict in our history? How could a people
who agree on such fundamentals fight a bloody civil
war. engage in violent labor-management disputes.
take to the streets in riots and demonstrations. and sue
each other in countless court battles? Conflict. even
violent struggles. can occur over speciri~ even
among those who share. at some level of abstraction.
common beliefs. Many political values may be irrelevant to specific controversies: there is ~
~for example. that would settle the question of
whether steelworkers ou ght to organize unions. More
important. much of our conflict has occurred precisely becau se we have strong beliefs that happen. as each
of us in terprets them. to be in conflict. Equality of
opportunity seems an att ractive idea. but sometimes it
can be pursued only by curtailing personal liberty.
another attractive idea. The states went to war in
1861 over one aspect of tbat conflict- the rights of
slaves versus tbe rights of slaveowners.
Indeed. the Civil War illustrates the way certain
.fundamental beliefs~abo ut how a democratic regime
ought to be organized have per s ist~des pite bitter conflict over the policies adopted by particular governments. When the southern states seceded from the
Union. tbey formed not a wholly different government
but one modeled. despite some importa nt differences.
on the U.S. Constitution. Even some of the language of
the Constitution was duplicated. suggesting that the
southern states believed not that a new form of gov~t or a different political culture ougbt to be
created but that the South was the true repository of
tbe existin g constitutional a nd cultural order. 9
Perhaps the most frequently encountered evidence tqat America ns believe themselves bound by
common values a nd common hopes has been the
persistence of the word AlI1 ericallisl11 in our political
vocabula ry. Throughout the nineteenth and most of
tbe twentietb centuries AlI1erical1.isll'1 and A,.nerican
way of life were familiar terms not only in Fourth of
July speeches but also in everyday disco urse. For
many years the House of Representatives had a com-

Political Culture

79

mittee ca ll ed the House Un- American Activities
Committee. There is hardly any exa mple to be found
abroad of such a way of thinking: There is no
"Britishi sm" or "Frenchism," and when Brito ns and
French people become worried about subversion.
they call it a problem of internal security, not a manifestation of "un-British" or "un-French " activities.

The Economic System
Americans judge the economic system using ma ny of
the same standards by which they judge the political
system, albeit with some very important differences.
As it is in American politics, liberty is impor tant in
the u.s. economy. Thus Americans support the idea
of a free-enterprise economic system. ca lling the
nation's economy "genera lly fair and efncient" and
denying that it "survives by keeping the poor
down." 10 However. there are limits to how much
freedom they think should exist in the marketplace.
People support governmen t regulation of business in
~order to keep some firm s from becoming too powerful
and to correct specific abuses. J 1
Americans are more willing to tolerate economk
inequality than politica l inequality. They believe in
~taining "equality of opportunity" in the economy but not "equality of results." If everyone has an
equal opportunity to get ahead, then it is all right for
people with more ability to earn hi gher salaries and
for wages to be set based on how hard people work
rather than on their economic needs . 12 Hardly
a nyone is upset by the fact that Bill Gates, Warren
Buffett, and Mel Gibson are rich men. Although
America ns are quite willing to support education
and training programs to help disadvantaged people
get a head, they are strongly opposed to anythin g
that looks like preferential treatmen t (for example.
hiring quotas) in the workplace.1 3
The leaders of very liberal political groups. such
as civil rights and feminist organizations. are more
willing than the average America n to su pport preferential treatment in the hiring and promoting of
minorities a nd women. They do so because, unlike
most citizens. they beli eve that whatever di sa d~
~minoritres a nd women fa ce are the r.esult QL
failures of the economic system rather than the fault
Jl.f individu qk 14 Even so. these leaders strongly support the idea that earn in gs should be based on ability and oppose the idea of having a ny top limi t on
what people can earn.' 5
This popular commi tment to economic individualism and personal responsibility may help explain

Tn the I 950s Senator Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin was
the inspiration for the word "McCnrthyism" nfter his highly
publicized attacks on alleged communists working in the
federal government.

how Americans think about particular public polIcies. such as welfare a nd civil righ ts . Polls show that
Americans are willing to help people "truly in need"
(thi s includes the elderly and the disabled) but not
those deemed "able to take care of themselves" (this
includes, in the public's mind , peopl e "on welfare").
Also. America ns dislike preferential hiring programs
and the use of quotas to dea l with racial inequality.
At the core of these policy attitudes is a widely
(but not universa lly) sh ared commitment to econom-~
ic individualism a nd personal responsibility. Some
schol ars. among them Donald Kinder a nd David
Sears. interpret these individualistic values as "symbolic racism"-a kind of pl ausible camouflage for
a ntibl ack attitudes. 16 But other scholars, such as
Paul M. Sniderman and M
.~ic~h~a..."..~'-lo!.l~~~.:....!:~
that these views are not
insensitivity but a genuine commitment to the ethic
of self-reli ance.1 7 Since there are many Americans
on both sides of this issue, debates about welfare and
civil rights tend to be especially intense. What is striking about the America n politica l culture is that in
this country the individualist view of social policy is ~
by far the most popul ar. ] R
~
Views about specific economic policies chan ge.
Americans now are much more inclined than they
once were to believe that the government should help
the needy and regulate business. But the commitment
to certain underlying principles has been remarkably

80

Chapter 4

American Political Culture

-enduring. In 1924 almost half of the high school students in Muncie. Indiana. said that "it is entirely the
fa ult of the man himself if he cannot succeed" and disagreed with the view that differences in wealth showed
that the system was unjust. Over half a cen tury later.
the students in this same high school were asked the
same questions again. with the sa me results. 19

Conlparing Anlerica with
Other Nations
The best way to learn what is distinctive about the
American politi cal culture is to compare it with that
of other nations. This comparison shows that Americans have somewhat different beliefs about the political system . the economic system . a nd religion.

The Political System
Sweden has a well-developed democratic govern ment. with a constitution. free speech. a n elected legislature. competing political parties. a nd a reasonably
honest a nd nonp a r tisa n burea ucracy. But the
Swedish political cu lture is signifi ca ntly different from
ours; it is more deferentia l than par ti cipatory. Though
a lmost a ll adult Swedes vote in nati ona l electi ons. few
participate in politiCS in a ny oth er way. They defer to
the decisions of experts and specia lists who work for
the government, rarely challenge governmental decisions in co urt. believe leaders a nd legislators ought to
decide issues on the basis of "what is best" more than
on "what the people want. " a nd value equ a lity as
much as (or more tha n) liberty.2o Whereas America ns are contentious, Swedes value harmony; while
Americans tend to assert their rights. Swedes tend to
observe their obligations.
The contra st in politica l cu ltures is even greater
w hen one looks at a nati on . such as Japa n . with a
wholly different history a nd set of traditions. On e
study compar ed the va lues expressed by a small
number of upper-statu s Japa nese with those of some
simil arly situ ated Ameri ca ns. Whereas the America ns emphasized the vir tues of individualism . com-

civic duty A belief that one has an obligation
to participate in civic and po litica l affairs.
civic competence A beli ef t hat one ca n affect
government policies.

petition. a nd equa lity in their politica l. econ omi c.
a nd socia l relations. the Ja pa nese attached greater
va lue to ma in ta inin g good relations with colleagues.
hav ing decisions mad e by gro ups. preserving socia l
harmony. a nd displaying respect for hierarchy. The
American s were more concerned tha n the Japa nese
with rul es a nd with treating oth ers fa irly but imperso na lly. with due rega rd for their ri ghts. Th e Japanese. on th e other ha nd . stressed th e impor ta nce of
being sensitive to the persona l needs of others. avo idin g con fli ct. a nd reaching decisions thro ugh discussion rath er than the application of ru les. 21 These
cultura l differences a ffect in pro found but hard-tomeas ure ways the workings of the politica l a nd economic systems of the two co untries. making them
functi on quite dif!'erentiy despite the fa ct that both
are industrialized. capitalist na ti ons.
It is easy to become carried away by the more obvious differences amon g nationa l cultures and to overgenera lize from them. Thinking in stereotypes about
the typical American. the typical Swede. or the typica l
Japanese is as risky as think ing of the typical white or
the typical black American. This ca n be especia lJy
misleading in nations. such as the United States a nd
Canada . that have been settled by a variety of ethnic
a nd religious groups (English-speaking versus Frenchspeakin g Ca nadians, for example. or Jew ish. Protesta nt.
a nd Cath olic America ns). But it is equally misleading to
suppose that the operation of a political system can be
understood entirely from the nation's objective features-its laws. economy, or physica l terrain.
In ] 959- 1960 Gabriel Almond a nd Sidney Verba
published a study of politica l culture in five nations.
In genera l they found that America ns. and to a lesser
degree citizens of Great Britain. had a stro nger sense
of civic duty (a belief that one has an obligation to
participate in civic a nd politi ca l a fTa irs) a nd a stronger
sense of civic competence (a belief that one can
affect government policies) tha n did the citizens of
Germ a ny, Ita ly. or Mexico. Over half of a ll Americans
a nd a third of a ll Britons believed that the average citizen ought to "be active in one's community." compared to only a tenth in Ita ly and a fifth in Germany.
Moreover. ma ny more Americans a nd Britons tha n
Germ a ns. Ita lia ns. or Mex ica ns believed that they
could "do something " about a n unju st nationa l law
or local regu lation.22 Since 19 60 nobody has asked
people in th ese five countries the sam e questions. a nd
hence we do not know whether these views have
changed in recent years. But in a 1995 study of citizen pa rticipation in politics, Verba a nd others report-

Comparing Ameri ca with Other Nations
ed th at w hile Am erica lagged behind Austria, the
Netherla nd s, West Germa ny, a nd the Uni ted Kingdom
in voter participation, w hen it ca me to ca mpa igning,
a ttending polit ical meetings, becomin g active in the
loca l community, a nd contactin g governmen t officia ls, Am erica ns were as active- or substa ntia lly
more acti ve- tha n citizens elsewhere, 23
Today the American people have less trust in government tha n th ey once did , But even so, popul ar
confid ence in political institutions rema ins higher
here than in many places abroad, In cross-n atio na l
sur veys conducted in th e 1990s in the United States
and sixteen oth er dem ocracies, America ns expressed
m ore confidence in public institutions (Congress/
Parlia m ent, the police, the armed forces, the legal system , and the civil service) th an did the citizens of a ll
but four other countries (Denmark, Ireland , Northern
Irela nd, and Norway), and greater confidence in private institutions (the church , m ajor compa nies, the
press , trade unions) tha n did the citizen s of a ny other
nation, 24 In other cross-n ationa l sur veys condu cted
in the 1990s, America ns were more likely th a n the
French or Germa n s to say th ey were "very patri otic"
(see Table 4,1), Of course, America ns kn ow that their
cou ntry has a lot of fa ults, Bu t even t he most di sa ffected voters believe the United States needs to cha nge
only cer ta in po licies, not its system of government, 25

The British HOllse oj Commons reflects a diffe rent political culturefrom thatfollnn in the United States.

T he resul ts (see Table 4.2) are quite striking. By
m argins of four or five to one the Swedish leaders
were more likely to believe in giving workers equa l
pay than were their American counterparts. Moreover. by m a rgin s of at least th ree to o ne. the Swedes
were more like ly th a n the Am erica ns to favor puttin g
a to p limi t o n in com es. 2 ()
Ju st wh at these differences in beliefs m ea n in dolla rs-an d-cents te rms was revea led by the a nswers to
a n ot he r qu estio n . Eac h g rou p was as ked wh at
should be the ratio between the income of an executive a nd that of a menial worker (a di shwas her in
Sweden . a n elevator operator in th e United Sta tes).
T he Swedish lea ders sa id the ratio should be a little
over two to o ne. Th at is. if the di shwasher earn ed
$2 00 a week. t he executive sho uld ea rn no m ore
th a n $440 to $480 a week. But th e Am erica n leaders were ready to let the executive ea rn between
$2,26 0 and $3. 040 per week when the elevator
operator w as ea rning $200 .

The Economic System
The politica l culture of Sweden is not only more deferentia l tha n ours but a lso more in cl in ed to favor equ a lity of resul ts over eq ua lity of opportunity, Sidney Verba
and Gary Orren compared the views of Swedish a nd
American trade union a nd politica l party leaders on a
variety of economic issues, In both countries the leaders were chosen from either blue-collar unions or the
m ajor libera l political party (the Democrats in the
United States, the Social Dem ocrats in Sweden),

Table 4.1

Germany
Percentage Agreeing

Statement

U,S,

France

Germany

I am very patriotic.
I am proud to be (American, etc.) ,
We should be willing to fight for our
country whether it is right or wrong .

51 %
74

27 %

25

26 %
23

22

17

5

Source: Adapted from The Public Perspective (APriIlMa® 23.

81

82

Chapter 4

Am erican Political Cu lture

Table 4.2

Equity in Sweden and the United States
Political Party Leaders
Sweden (Social Democrats)

Favor equ ality of results ( % )
Favor equal pay (%)
Favor t o p limit on income (%)
Fair income rati o of executive
to menial worker*

21%
58
44
2:1

Blue-Collar Union Leaders

U.S. (Democrats)

Sweden

9%
12

14%
68
51
2:1

17
15:1

U.S.
4%
11

13
11 : 1

*In Sweden menial worker was a dishwasher; in US. menial worker was an elevator operator.
Source: Reprinted by permission of the publisher from Equa lity in America. The View from the Top by Sidney Verba and Gary R. Orren,

Cambridge: Harvard University Press, Copyright ~y the Presidents and Fellows of Harvard College.

American s. compared to people in many other
countries , are more likely to think that freedo m is
m ore im por ta n t tha n equality and less likely to think
that hard work goes unrewarded or that the government should guarantee citizens a basic standard of
living (see Table 4.3). These cu ltura l differences
make a difference in po litics. In fact there is less
income inequality in Sweden than in the United
States- t he government sees to that.

The Civic Role of Religion
In the 18 3 0s Tocqueville was a mazed at how rel igious
America ns were in comparison to his fellow European s. From the first days of the new Republic right
down to the present, America has been among the
most religiOUS countries in the world. 27 The average
American is more lilcely than the average European to
believe in God, to pray on a daily basis, and to acknowledge clear standards of rig ht and wrong (see Table 4.4).
There is some evidence that America ns are becoming more religious. It is doubtful that this is true for
American elites (see Chapter 7) but it seems clear that

Table 4.3

mass religiosity has increased som ewhat over the last
two decades. For example. the percentage of Americans who Hcompletely agree" that "God reaUy exists"
rose from 68 percent in 1987 to 79 percent in 1997,
and, over the same period, the percentage who "completely agree" th at "prayer is an important part of my
daily life" rose from 41 percent to 53 percent. 28 It is
clear that America rema ins a highly reli gio us nation ,
both in absolute term s and relative to most European
countries (see Tables 4.5 a nd 4 .6) .
Many present-d ay Am erica ns , howe ver, are
a ttracted to reli gion as much for its civic as fo r its spiritua l signifi ca nce. Churches. synagogues, mosques.
and other reli gious or gan izations are the co untry's
major so urce of vo lu nteer and community ser vices:
Ha lf of th eir members do unpaid community work
each year; nine in ten give money to ch arity ; and
eight in ten give goods, clothing, or other property to
charity. 29 In many urba n communities a ll across the
country, religious organization s are major or sole
providers of myriad social a nd health care ser vices to
low-income children , yo uth , and famili es. 30

Attitudes toward Econ mic ECluality in America and Europe
Percentage Agreeing

Statement

U.S.

Great Britain

Germany

Italy

France

It is government's responsibility t o take care
of the very poor who can't take care of themse lves.
Hard work guarantees success.
Government sho uld not guarantee every citizen
food and basic shelter.

23 %

62 %

50 %

66 %

62 %

63
34

46
9

38

51
14

46
10

13

Source: Adapted from The Public Perspective (NOVember/Decemb@ 5, 7. © The Public Perspective, a publication of the Roper Cen-

ter for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut, Storrs. Reprinted with permission .

Comparil1g America with Other Natiol1s

Table 4.4

~ gious Belief in America and Europe

Percentage Agreeing
Statement

U.S.

Great Britain

I never doubt the existence of God.
Prayer is an important part of my daily life.
There are clear guidelines about what is
good and evi l.

60%
77

31%
37

79

65

Germany

Italy

France

20%

44

56 %
69

29%
32

54

56

64

Source: Adapted from The Public Perspective (November/Decembert199'1)) 5, 8. Reprinted by permission of The Public Perspective, a publication of the Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University ~necticut.

Table 4.5

Religion in America Today
Percentage of Adult Americans

Believe in God
Say they have a personal relationship with God
Never doubt God's existence
Say they are seeking to grow in religious faith
Pray at least daily
Are a member of a church, synagog ue, mosque,
or other organized religious group
Say religion ca n so lve all or most of today's problems
Attend worship services more than once a month

96%
80
79
76
75
64
61
54

Source: Adapted from George Gallup, Jr., and Timothy Jones, The Next American Spirituality (Colorado Springs, Colo:
appendices 1 and 2.

Religion and Politics
Religious beliefs have always played a significant role in
American politics. The religious revivalist movement of
the late 1730s and early 1 740s (known as the First
Great Awakening) transformed the political life of the
American colonies. Religious ideas fueled the breal<
with England, which, in the words of the Declaration of
Independence, had violated "the laws of nature and
nature's God. " Religious leaders were central to the
struggle over slavery in the nineteenth century and the
temperance movement of the early twentieth century.
Both liberals and conservatives have used the pulpit to promote political cha nge. The civil ri ghts movement of the 1950s and 1960s was led mainly by
bl ack religious leaders, most prominently Martin
Luther King, Jr. In the 1980s a conservative religious
group know n as the Mora l Majority advoca ted constitutional amendments that would allow prayer in
public sc hoo ls a nd ba n abor tion. In the 199 0 s
a nother co nservative reli gious group, the Christi a n
Coalition. a ttracted a n enormous amount of media

Coo~ch . 1,

attention and became a prominen t force in ma ny
national , sta te, and local elections.
Candidates for national ofilce in most contemporary
democracies mention religion rarely if they mention it
at all. ot so in America. During the 2000 presidential

America is much more religious than almost any European
democracy.

83

84

Chapter 4

American Political Culture

Table 4.6 R:ligion in Industrial Nations, 1990-1993
Percentage Answering Yes
Statement

U.S.

Sweden

France

W. Germany

Britain

Spain

Canada

Mexico

W oul d you say you are ...
A religious person?
Not a religious person?
A convinced atheist?
Not sure

82%
15
1
2

29%
56
7
9

48 %
36
11
5

54%
27
2
17

55%
37
4
4

64%
27
4
5

69%
26
3
2

72%

22
2
4

Source: Adapted from The Public Perspective, reporting data f rom surveys conducted from 1990 to 1993 by the Inter-University Consort ium
for Political and Social Research . The Public Perspective (Storrs: Roper Center for Publ ic Opinion Research, University of Connecticut,
April/May 1995): 2. © The Public Perspective. Reprinted by permission.

campa ign. for example, both Democratic candidate AI
Gore and Republican candidate George W. Bush the
younger gave major speeches extolling the virtues of
religion and advocating the right of religious organizations that deliver social services to receive government
funding on the same basi s as a ll other nonprofit orga nizations. Both Bush a nd Gore were respond ing in part
to public support for so-called faith-ba sed approaches
to solvin g social ills. In 2000. three-quarters of all
Americans favored a ll owing churches, synagogues,
mosques. and other houses of worship to apply for government fund in g to provide social serv ices such as
homeless shelters. job training. or drug treatment
counselin g to people who need them. 3 1 When asked, in
general. w ho ca n do the best job of providing social
services to those in need, 40 percent of Americans said
fa ith-based organizations. 28 percent chose federal a nd
state governm ent agencies. and 25 percent opted for
secular community groups. 32
The genera l feeling about religion beca me apparent when a federal appea ls court in 2002 tried to ban
the Pledge of Allegiance because it contained the
phrase "under God." There was an overwhelming
and bipa rtisan condemnation of the ruling. To a
degree th at would be a lmost unthinkable in m any
other democracies, religious beliefs w ill probably
continue to sh a pe po li tical culture in America [or
many generations to co me.

The Sources of Political
Culture
That America ns bring a distinctive way of thinkin g
to their po li tica l life is easier to dem o nstrate than to

explain. But even a brief. and necessarily superficial,
effort to understand the sources of our politica l cu lture can help make its Signi fi cance clearer.
The American Revolution, as we discussed in
Chapter 2. was essentia lly a war fought over liberty:
an asser tion by the co lonists of w hat they took to be
their r ig hts. T hou g h the Constitution . produ ced
eleven years after the Revolu tion, ha d to dea l w ith
other issues as well , its a nima ting spirit reflected the
effort to reconci le personal liberty with the needs of
socia l contro l. These founding exper iences. a nd th e
po liti ca l disputes th at fo ll owed . have given to America n politica l thou g ht a nd c ulture a preoccupation
with the assertion and m a intenance of rig hts. Thi s
tradition has imbu ed the dai ly condu ct of U. S. politics with a kind of adversarial spirit quite fore ign to
the polit ica l life of countries that did not under go a
libertarian revolution or that were formed o ut of an
interest in other goals. su ch as socia l equality.
national independen ce. or ethnic suprem acy.
The adversarial spirit of th e American political
culture rel1ects not only our preoccupation with
rights but a lso our lon g-stan ding distrust of authority and of people wielding power. Th e co lonies' experien ces w ith British rule was one source of that
distrust. But a noth er. older source was the religious
belief of many America ns , which saw human nature
as fundamentally depraved. To the coloni sts a ll of
mankind suffered from orig inal sin . symbo lized by
Adam and Eve eatin g the forbidden fruit in the Garde n of Eden. Since no one was born innocent, no one
co uld be trusted with power. Thus th e Co nstitution
h ad to be des igned in su ch a way as to curb the da rker side of hum an nature. Otherwise everyone's rights
wou ld be in jeopa rd y.

The Sources of Political Culture
The co ntentiousness of a people a nimated by a
susp icion of government and devoted to individua lism could eas ily h ave made dem ocratic politics so
tumul tuous as to be impossible. After all one must be
willin g to trust others with power if there is to be any
kind of de mocratic government, an d sometimes
those others w ill be people not of one's own choosing. The first great test case took place around 1800
in a battl e between the Federa lists, led by John Ada ms
and Alexa nd er Ha mil to n , a nd the Democrati cRepublicans, led by Thomas Je fferso n a nd Ja mes
Mad ison. The two factions deeply di strusted each
other: Th e Federalists had passed laws designed to
suppress Jeffersonian journalists; Jefferson suspected
the Federalists were out to subvert the Co nsti tu tion;
a nd the Federalists believed Jefferson in tended to sell
out the country to France. But as we shall see in
Ch apter 9 , the threat of civil war never materialized,
and the Jeffersonian s ca me to power peacefully.
Within a few years the ro le of a n oppos ition party
beca me legitimate, and people aba nd oned th e idea of
making serious effor ts to suppress their opponents.
By happy circumstance peopl e came to accept that
liber ty a nd orderly poli tica l cha nge coul d coexist.
The Co nstitu tion. by creating a federa l system a nd
dividing po litica l a uthority a mong competing institutio ns, prov id ed a mple opportunity for w id esprea d- though hardly u niversa l- pa rti cipation in
poli tics. The election of Jefferso n in 1800 produced
no politica l catastrophe, a nd those who had predicted one were. to a degree. discredi ted. But other, more
fundamenta l features of American life contributed to
the same en d. One of the most impor tant of these
was religious diversity.
The absence of an established or offi cial religion
for the nation as a whole, reinforced by a constitu tiona l prohibition of such an establishment a nd by
the migration to this co untry of people with different
religious background s, mea n t that religiou s diversity
was inevitabl e. Since there co uld be no orthodox
or officia l reli gion , it became difficult for a cor responding po li tical orthodoxy to emerge. Moreover,
the conflict between the P urita n traditi on , with its
emph as is on fa ith a nd hard work, a nd the Ca tholi c
Church , w ith its devotion to the sacraments a nd
priestly a uthority. proV ided a recurren t source of
cleavage in Ameri ca n public life. The differences in
va lues between these two groups showed up not only
in their reli gious practices but a lso in areas involvin g
the reg ulation of ma nn ers a nd mora ls, a nd even in

people's ch oice of politica l party. For more tha n a
century candid ates for state and national offi ce were
deeply divided over whether the sa le of liqu or should
be prohibited, a question that arose ultimately out of
competin g reli gious doctrines.
Eve n though there was no esta blished church ,
there was certain ly a domin a nt reli gious traditi onProtesta n tism, a nd especia lly P uritanism. The
Protestant churches prov id ed peop le with both a set
of beliefs and a n organizationa l experience that had
profound effects on American politica l culture. Those
beliefs encouraged, or even required, a life of personal achievement as well as religious conviction: a
believer had a n obligation to work, save money, obey
th e secular law, and do good works. Max Weber
expla ined the rise of capitalism in part by what he
called the Protestant ethic- what we now sometimes
call the work ethic. 33 Such values had politica l consequences, as people holding them were motivated to
engage in civic a nd commu nal acti on.
Churches offered ready opportunities for developing and practicin g civic and po litical skill s. Since
most Protesta nt churches were orga nized a long congregationa llin es- that is, the church was co ntrolled
by its members, who put up the buildi ng, hired the
preac her, and superv ised the fina nces- they were, in
effect, miniatu re poli tica l systems, with leaders and
committees, conflict and co nsensus. Developing a
participatory po li tica l cul ture was und o ubtedly
made eas ier by the existence of a pa rticipatory religious culture. Even some Catholic churches in early
America were under a degree of lay con trol. Parishioners own ed the church property, negotiated with
priests, and conducted church business.
All aspects of culture, including the political, are
preserved and transmitted to new generations primarily by the fa mily. Thou gh some believe that the weakening of the family unit has eroded the extent to which
it tra nsmits anything, particularly culture, a nd has
enlarged the power of other sources of values- the
mass media and the world of fri ends and fashion ,
leisure a nd entertairunent- there is still little doubt
that the ways in which we think about the world are
largely acquired w ithin the family. In Chapter 7 we
sha ll see that the family is the primary source of one
kind of political attitude-identification with one or
another political party. Even more importa nt, the fa mily shapes in subtl e ways how we think and act on
politica l matters. Erik Erikson. the psychologist, noted
certa in traits that are more char acteristic of America n

85

86

Chapter 4

American Political Culture

than of Europea n fa mili es- the greater freedom
enjoyed by child ren . for example. and the larger measure of equa lity among family members. These famili al
characteri stics promote a belieC carried through life,
that every person ha s rights deservi ng protection and
th at a variety of interests have a legitimate claim to
consideration when decisions are made. 34
The combined erfect of religious a nd ethnic diversity. a n individu a listic phil osophy. fragmented politica l authority. and the relatively ega litarian America n
family ca n be seen in the absence of a high degree of
class consciousness among America ns. Class consciousness mea ns thinking of oneself as a worker
whose interests are in opposition to those of management. or vice versa. In this country most people, whatever their jobs, think of th emselves as "middle cl ass."
Though the writings of Horatio Alger are no
longer popular. America ns still seem to believe in the
message of those stories-that the opportunity for
success is ava il able to people who work hard . This
may help explain why the United States is the only
large indu strial democracy without a significa nt
socia li st party and why the n ation ha s been slow to
adopt certain welfa re progra ms.

~r
Almost all America ns share some elements of a common politica l culture. Why. t hen . is there so mu ch
cultura l co nOict in America n politics ? For many
yea rs, the most expl os ive politica l issues have included abortion . gay ri gh ts, dru g use. school prayer, and
pornography. Viewed from a Marxist perspective, politics in the United States is utterly ba fnin g: instea d of
two economic classes engaged in a bitter struggle
over wea lth, we h ave two cul tural cl asses locked in a
war over values.
To say that there are two cu ltural classes is. of
course. an oversimplification. but to say that there is
a culture wa r is not an exaggeration. 35 Groups supportin g a nd opposin g the right to abortion have had

The Culture

A belief that you are a
member of an economic group whose interests
are opposed to people in other such groups.
orthodox A belief that morality and religion
ought to be of decisive importance.
progressive A belief that personal freedom
and solving social problems are more important than religion .
class consciousness

many angry confrontations in recent yea rs. The latter have been arrested wh ile attempting to block
access to abortion clinics: some clinics have been firebombed: a nd at least seven physicians have been
kill ed. A co ntroversy over w hat sc hoo lchildre n
should be taught about homosexua ls was responsible. in pa rt. for the firin g of the hea d of the New York
City school system: in other states there have been
fierce arguments in state legislatures a nd before the
courts over whether gay a nd lesbi a n coupl es should
be allowed to marry or adopt children. Although
most America ns want to keep heroin, coca ine, and
other dru gs illegal. a sign ificant number of peopl e
want to lega lize (or at least decrimina lize) their use.
The Supreme Court has ruled that child ren cann ot
pray in publi c schools, but this has not stopped many
parents and school authorities from trying to reinstate sc hool prayer. or at least prayerlike moments of
silence. The di scovery that a federa l agency. the
Nation al Endowment for the Arts, had given money
to support exhibitions a nd performances that many
people thought were obscene led to a furious congressiona l struggle over the future of t he agency.
The cul ture war differs from other political disputes (over such matters as taxes. bu sin ess regu lations. and foreign policy) in severa l ways: money is
not at sta ke. compromises are a lm ost imposs ible to
arrange. a nd th e conOict is more profound . It is animated by deep differences in people's beliefs about
private and publi c morali ty- that is, about the stan da rd s t hat ought to govern individu a l behav ior and
soc ial a rrangements. It is about what kind of country we ought to live in. not just about what kinds of
policies our governm ent oug ht to adopt.
To Simplify. there are two opposed camps. the
orthodox and the progressive. On the orthodox
side are people who believe that morality is as importan t as. or more importa nt than. self-expression and
that moral rul es derive from the commands of God or
the laws of nature- comma nd s and laws that are
relatively clea r. uncha ngin g, a nd independent of
individu a l preferences. On the progressive side are
people who think that personal freedom is as important as . or more importa n t t han. certa in traditional
mora l rules a nd that those rul es must be eva lu ated in
li ght of the circ umsta nces of modern life- circumsta nces th at are quite compl ex. cha ngea bl e. and
dependent on individu a l preferences.
Most conspi cuou s among the orthodox are fund amenta li st Protesta n ts a nd eva ngelica l Christi a ns.

Mistrust of Government
a nd so critics who dislike orthodox views often dismiss them as the fanatical expression s of "the Religious Ri ght.·' But many people who hold orthodox
views a re not fan atica l or deeply religious or rightwing on most issues: they simply have stro ng views
about drugs. pornography, and sexual morality. Similarly, the progressive side often includes members of
libera l Protestant denominations (for example, Episcopalian s and Unitarian s) and people with no strong
reli gious beliefs, and so their critics often denounce
them as immoral, anti-Christian radicals who have
embraced the ideology of secular humanism, the
belief that moral standa rd s do not require religious
justifi ca tion. But in all likelihood few progressives are
immora l or anti-Christian. and most do not regard
sec ular humanism as their defining ideology.
Moreover. the culture war is occurring not just
between different religious denominations but also
within th em. Catholic. Protestant. and Jewish leaders with an orthodox perspective tend to assign great
importa nce to two-parent famili es. condemn pornography, denounce homosexuality. and think the
United States is in genera l a force for good in the
world. Leaders of the sa me faith s who have a progress ive outlook are more likely to say that many
legitimate a lternatives to the traditional two-parent
famil y exist, that pornography a nd homosexuality
are private matters protected by individual rights,
a nd that the United States has been at best a neutra l
a nd at worst a bad force in world a fTa irsY' This conni ct between the orthodox a nd progressive view of
America n culture is simil ar to. an d ha s many of the
sa me causes. as the cleavage (described in Chapter 5)
between the traditional middle class and the new
middle class.
American history has always had conflicts of this
sort. but they have acquired special importance
today as a result of two major changes in American
society. The first is the great in crease in the proportion of people who consider th emselves progressive.
Once a lmost everyone was religiously orthodox, even
if politica lly libera l: today fewer are. The second factor is the rise of media (such as television . direct-mail
adverti sin g. and the Internet) that make it easy to
wage a cultural war on a large sca le. In the past
preachers. writers. a nd lecturers cou ld reach at most
a few hundred people at a time: today television
eva ngeli sts. radi o ta lk-s how hosts. a nd the a uthors of
direct-mail messages or web sites ca n wage a furiou s
war of words reaching tens of million s of people and

recruiting hundreds of thousands of followers . A
cu ltura l wa r that once enlisted only a few activists
ca n now mobilize mass armies.

Mistrust of Governlnent
There is one aspect of public opinion that worries
many people. Since the late 1950s there has been a
more or less steady decl ine in the proportion of
Americans who say they trust the government in
Wash in gto n to do the right thing. In the past, polls
showed that about three-quarters of Americans said
they trusted Washington most of the time or just
about always. but by 1980 that proportion had
decl ined sharply to about one-quarter. The level of
trust briefly rose during the Reagan administration
but sank back down about the time he left office.
Another measure pollsters use shows pretty much
the sa me thing. Between 1952 and 1992 the fraction of Americans who said public officials did not
care what the public thought doubled from one-third
to two-thirds (see Figure 4.1 on page 89). 37
Before we get too upset about this, we should
remember that people are talking about government
offi cia ls. not the system of government. Americans
are mu ch more supportive of the co untry and its
institutions than Europea ns are of theirs. Even so.
the decline in confidence in officia ls is striking. There
are a ll sorts of explanations for why it has happened.
In the 1960s there was our unhappy war in Vietnam, in the 1970s President ixon had to resign
because of his involvement in the Watergate scandal.
a nd in the 1990s President Clinton went through
scanda ls that led to his being impeached by the
House of Representatives (but not convicted of that
charge by the Senate).
But there is another way of looking at the matter.
Maybe in the 19 50s we had an abnormally high level
of confidence in government. one that could never be
expected to last no matter what a ny president did.
After all. when President Eisenhower took office in
1952. we had won a war aga in st fascism. overcome
th e Depression of the 1930s. possessed a nea r
monopoly of the atom bomb, had a currency that was
the envy of the world, a nd domin ated internation al
trade. Moreover. in those days not mu ch was expected
out of Washington. Hardly a nybody thought that
there should be importa nt federa l laws about civil
rights, crime, ill ega l drugs. the environment, the role

87

88

Chapter 4

American Political Culture

Protests and demonstration s are a common feature of American politics, as with this attack in
Seattle on American membership in the Wo rld Trade Organization in November 2001. Yet, despite
disagreements Americans are a patriotic people, as seen in this photo oj baseballJans
waving }lags and singing "God Bless America," taken a Jew days aJter 9/ 11.

of women, high way safety, or a lmost a nything else
one now finds on the national agend a. Sin ce nobody
expected much out of Washin gton, nobody was upset
that they didn 't get mu ch out of it.
Th e 196 0s a nd 1970s c ha nged a ll of tha t.
Domestic turmoil , urba n ri ots, a civil rights revoluti on, the wa r in Vietn a m, eco nomi c infla tion, and
a new co ncern for the environment dra matically
in creased what we expected Was hingto n to do. And
since these probl ems a re very difficul t on es to solve, a
lot of peopl e beca me co nvinced that our politicia ns
co uldn' t do much .
Those events also pushed the feelings Americans
had about their country-that is, their patriotisminto the background . We liked the country, but there
weren' t many occasions w hen expressing that
approval seemed to make much sense. But on September 11. 2001 , w hen hij acked a irliners were
crashed by terrorists into the World Trade Center in
New York City and the Pentagon in Washington, aUof
that changed. There was a n extrao rdinary outburst of
patriotic fervor, with fl ags displ ayed everywhere, fire
a nd poli ce heroes wid ely celebrated, a nd strong
national suppor t for our going to wa r in Afghani sta n
to find the key ter rori st. Osa ma bin Laden, a nd
destroy the tyra nnica l Ta liba n regime that he supported. By ovember of that yea r about ha lf of a ll
America ns of both politica l parties sa id that they
trusted Washin gton offi cials to do what is right most
of the time. the highest level in ma ny years.

Those who h ad hoped or predi cted that this new
level of support would last. not ebb a nd flow, have
been disa ppoin ted. In October 2001 , 57 percent of
Americans (up from just 29 percent in July 2001 )
sa id th ey trusted the federa l government to do wh at
is ri ght just about always or most of the time. But by
May 200 2. only 4 0 percent ex presssed such tru st in
the federa l governm ent, a nd 57 perce nt sa id they
tru sted Was hingto n only so me of the time or
never.38 Still , it is premature to co nclude that we
have seen th e last of post-September 11 surges in
s uppo rt for the federa l gove rnm ent. Much will
depend on h ow citizen s will eva luate overa ll government performance. whether Was hington will be
widely credited with foilin g terrorist attacks in the
future, and how people will understand and respond
to specific proposals.
As Figure 4 .2 shows, public confidence in many
institutions, such as Congress, newspapers. churches, and the Supreme Court. does not cha nge much:
Co ngress a nd newspa pers have rather littl e support;
churches and the Supreme Court have a lot. But support for the military and the presid ency changes
quite a bit: backing for the milita ry increased dramati ca lly a fter we went to wa r in Afgha nista n a nd
[ra g. a nd backing for th e presid ency rose a fter the
sca ndal s touching the Clinton admini stration had
passed.
There a re differences in how much co nfidence
va rious groups have. Afri ca n Ameri ca ns, for exam-

Political EJj'icnclj

Figure 4.1

Trust in the Federal Government, 1958-2002

80

QUEST I ON

70

How much of the time do you think
you can trust the government in
Washington to do what is rightjust about always, most of the time,
or only some of the time?

60
50
Q)

01)

2c
Q)

-

40

u

li;

"-

30

Just about always

-

Most of t he t ime

-

Some of the time

-

None of the time

20
10

1958

1962

1966

1970

1974

1978

1982

1986

1990

1994

1998

2002

Note, Oat a not available for 1960 and 1962.

Source: University of Michigan, The National Election Studies.

pi e. have more confidence in orga nized reli gion a nd
less confid ence in the crimina l justice system th a n do
whi te Americans. But both blacks and wh ites have
far more co nfidence in churches tha n they do in

Figure 4.2

Public Confidence in Institutions,
1981-2004

-

Ch urches

-

-

Mil itary

-

Newspapers

-

Supreme Court

-

Congress

President

Political Efficacy

100
"iii

Perha ps the most wor risome aspec t of recent
cha nges in the America n politica l culture is the
decl ine in the extent to which citizens fee l that the
po litica l system wil l respond to their needs a nd
belief's. These cha nges are in what scholars ca ll a citizen 's sense of poli tical e ffi cacy, by which they
mean a citizen 's capacity to understan d an d influence politica l events .

Q)

""0

ro

Q)

Q)

;:00

U

ro

""0

80

C
Q)

Q)

-=c

.>;;;

u

> 0
ro

60

~o

:5

1?

:'2

ro ro

</)

40

.~

0

.>;;;

::J

:;:

crimin a l courts. Three-quarters of both say that they
are "proud to live under our politi ca l system," a nd 95
percent of both say that there are no "cou ntries better tha n the Uni ted States."39 In sum, without regard
to race or other factors, most Americcm s no longer
give to poli tica l leaders a nd their poli cies the kind of
support they gave in the 1950s, bu t they h ave never
lost confidence in either the politica l system or each
other.

p-

Q)

01)

2c 6

20

Q)

<:

Q)

"1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

Source. Gallup Pol l, poll dated May 21-23,2004.

2000

2004

political e fficacy A belief th at you can take
part in po litics (intern al effi cacy) o r that th e
governm ent wi ll respond t o the citizenry
(ext ern al effi cacy) .

89

90

Chapter 4

Figure 4.3

American Political Culture

Changes in the Sense of Political Efficacy, 1952-2002

80

Internal Efficacy

STATEMENTS

70

-

Politics is too complicated.

-

People don't have a say in what
the government does.

60
Q)
Q)

0"

50

'"0
.s::.
;;

Q)

External Efficacy
40

S TATEMENT

00

c'"

-

Q)

u

Qj

30

I don't think public officials care
much what people like me think.

CL

20

10

1952

19 56

1960

1964 1968

1972

19 76

1980

1984 1988

1992

1996 2000

2002

Source: University of Michigan, The National Election Studies.

This sense of efficacy has two parts-inter nal
effi ca cy (the ability to understand and ta ke part in
poli tica l affairs) and externa l efficacy (the ability to
make the system respond to the citizenry). Since the
mid -1960s there has been a fairly sharp drop in the
sense of external efficacy (or system responsiveness)
but not much ch ange in the sense of in ternal efficacy (personal compete nce).
As we ca n see in Figure 4.3. peopl e today are not
much different from people in 195 2 with respect to
whether they can understand what is going on in
government (most !lnd it too complicated to fathom)
and whether they have much say in what the government does. But there has been a big change in
how responsive people think the government is to
their interests. Between 2000 and 2002 . the co nfi-

internal efficacy

Th e ability t o understan d
and t ake part in po liti cs.
exte rnal efficacy The w ill ingness of th e state
t o res pond to th e citi zenry.

dence peop le have in American government went up.
also surely because the government was struggling
to cope with a nationa l crisis- the destruction of
buildings by the terrorist attacks on September 11.
2001. But after 2002 . co nfid ence in the government
bega n to drop again.
Unli ke the increase in the mistrust of government.
the increase in the feeling that government is unresponsive has not been sha ped by a ny particular
events; the sense of external efficacy dro pped more
or less steadily throughout the 1 960s and 1970s.
What seems to have happened is that Americans
gradually have come to the view that government
has become too big a nd pervasive for it to be sensitive
to citizen preferences.
Though Am erican s may feel less effective as citizens than they once did . their sense of efficacy
remains mu ch higher tha n it is among Europeans. A
poll taken in five nations found that the average
America n scored significantly higher on the effi cacy
scale than the average perso n in Austria. Germany.
Great Britain. or the Netherlands. Moreover. Americans were much more li kely than Europeans to say

Political Tolerance
that they regularly discussed politics, signed petiti ons, a nd wo rked to so lve co mmunity problems. 4o
Th ough Ameri cans a re less likely to vote tha n Europea ns, they a re more likely to do the ha rder chores
that ma ke up democra ti c poli tics.
Because Americans a re less likely than they once
were to hold their leaders in hi gh esteem, to have
co nfidence in government policies, and to believe the
system will be responsive to popular wishes, some
obse rvers like to say th at Ameri ca ns tod ay are more
"a li enated" from poli tics. Perh aps, but careful studies
of the subj ect have not yet been abl e, for exa mpl e, to
demonstrate a ny relationship between overall levels
of public trust in government or confidence in leaders, on the one hand , a nd the rates at which people
come out to vote, on the other. There is, however,
some evidence that the less voters trust political instituti ons a nd lea ders, the more likely they are to
support candidates from the nonincumbent major
pa rty (in two-ca ndidate races) a nd third-party candidates.41 If this is so, it helps to expl a in why the
in cumbent pa rty h as lost, and third parties h ave
strongly co ntested, nve of the la st nine pres identia l
elections (1968- 2 000).

~ Political Tolerance
Democratic politics depends cru cia lly on citize ns'
being reaso na bly tolera nt of the op inions and
acti ons of others. If unpopula r speakers were always
shouted dow n, if government efforts to censor newspapers were usually met with popular support or
even public indifference, if peaceful demonstrations
were regularly broken up by hostile mobs, if the losin g candid ates in an election refused to allow their
victorious opponents to take office, then the essential
elements of a democratic politica l culture would be
missing, and democracy would fa il. Democracy does
not require perfect tol era nce; if it did , the passions of
hum a n n a ture wo uld make democracy for ever
imposs ible. Bu t at a minimum citizens mu st h ave a
poli tical cultu re that a ll ows the di scussion of ideas
a nd the selection of rul ers in a n atmosphere reason ably free of oppression.
Public opini on sur veys show th at the overwhelming maj ority of Ameri ca ns ag ree with co ncepts su ch
as freedom of speec h , majority rule, a nd the ri ght to

circul ate peti tions-at least in the abstra ct. 42 But
when we get dow n to co ncrete cases, a good many
Ameri ca ns are not very tolerant of groups they
dislike. Suppose you must decid e which groups will
be permi tted to espouse their ca uses a t meetings
held in yo ur co mmunity's civic a udi torium. Which
of th ese groups would you a ll ow to run such a
meetin g?
Protestants holdin g a rev iva l meeting
Ri ght-to-life groups opposing abortion
Peopl e protesting a nuclear power plant
Feminists organizin g a march for the Equal
Rights Amendment
5. Gays organizing for homosexua l rights
6. Atheists preaching against God
7. Students organizing a sit-in to shut down city hall

1.
2.
3.
4.

In general, Americans have become a bit more
toleran t. As yo u ca n see in Figure 4.4, we say (perhaps acc urately) that we are more willing to tolerate
Communists, people who teach aga in st churches and
reli gions, advoca tes of governm ent ownership of
indu stries, a nd people who think that bl acks are
geneti ca lly inferi or. In Figure 4.6 we see that people
are today more likely th a n in the past to say they are
willin g to vote for a n otherwise qu a lined person who
ra n for president even if the candidate was a Catholi c,
a Jew, a woman , a bl ack, or a homosexual. 43
On e person 's civic intolera nce ca n be a nother
perso n's hea rtfelt displ ay of civic concern. As is suggested by Figure 4.5, most America ns believe that
seri ous civic pro bl ems are rooted in a breakdown of
mora l values. Correctly or not, m ost citizens worry
that the nati on is becoming too tol erant of behaviors th at ha rm society, a nd they favor defending
comm on moral stand ards over protecting individual
rights .
Nonetheless, this maj ority tolerance for many
causes should not blind us to th e fact that for most of
us there is some group or ca use from which we are
willin g to withh old politica l liberties- even though
we end orse those liberti es in the abstract.
If mos t peopl e di slike on e or a nother group
stron gly enough to deny it certain political rights
that we usua lly ta ke for gra nted, how is it that such
groups (a nd such ri ghts) survive? The answer, in
pa rt. is that most of us don' t act on our beliefs. We
ra rely ta ke the troubl e- or have th e cha nce- to
bl ock a nother perso n from making a speec h or

91

92

Chapter 4

Figure 4.4

American Poli tical Culture

Public Tolerance for Advocates of Unpopular Ideas, 1954-1998
Person Should
Be Allowed to
Make a Speech

An admitted Communist

1954 _

28%

1972 _
1998

Someone against
churches and religion

Someone who believes
that blacks are
geneti cally inferi or

Person's Book
Should Remain
in the Li brary
_

6%
52 %

39%
67%

1954 ......_ _.....

29%
53%

_

67%

57%

_

12%

1972
1998

Someone who favors
government ownership
of all railroads and
large industries

Person Sh ou Id
Be Allowed to
Teach in College

37%

40%
75%

____

77 %

38%
_ _ _ _ _ _ 56%

1954
1972

~_

58 %

1998 *

1954 *
1972

61 %

1998 _

62%

41 %
46%

62%
63%

*Question not asked

Source: Adapted from Robert S. Erickson and Kent L. Tedin, American Public Opinion, 6th ed. Copyrigh t ©

2001 by Longman . Repri nted by permission.

teaching school. Some scholars have argued that
among people who are in a position to deny other
people rights-officeholders and political activists,
for example-the level of political tolerance is somewhat greater than among the public at large, but
that claim has been strongly disputed ,44
But another reason may be just as important.
Most of us are ready to deny some group its rights,
but we usu ally can't agree on which group that
should be, Sometimes we ca n agree, and then the disliked group may be in for real troub le. There have
been times (1919- 1920. an d aga in in the ea rly
1950s) when socialists or communists were disliked
by most peop le in the United States. The governmenl
on each occasion took strong actions against them.
Today fewer people agree that these left-wing groups

are a major domestic threat, and so their rights are
now more secure,
Fina lly, the courts are sufficiently insulated from
public opinion that they can act against majority sentiments and enforce constitutional protections (see Cha pter 16). Most of us are not willing to
give all ri ghts to all gro ups, but most of us are not
judges.
These facts shou ld be a sober reminder that politica l liberty ca nnot be taken for gra nted. Men and
women are not. it wou ld seem . born with an inclin ation to li ve and let live. at least po litica lly, and
many- possibly most- never acqu ire that in clin ation. Liberty must be learned and protected. Happ ily
the United States during mu ch of its recent history
ha s not been consumed by a revu lsion for anyone

Political Tolerance
Figure 4.5

93

Views of Toleration and Morality

QUESTION

QUESTION

Which worries you more, that the country will become
too tolerant of behaviors that are bad for sociey, or
that the country will become too intolerant of beha viors
that don't do any real harm to society?

Is it more important to defend standards of right
and wrong, to protect the rights of individuals, or
are both equally importanf7

1998

1998

~ No opinion 3%

I /

6%

Both eq uall y important 3%

, Pw'", ,ight,

3:)

of in dividua ls
Too tolerant

66%

Americans who pick out "a letdown in moral va lu es"
as one of the " major ca uses of ou r problems today "

70

60

50

.,
.,u

OJ)

2c

a;

(L

,-/

40

30

20

10

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Source: The American Enterprise (Janua ry/February 1999): 37, reporting data from Roper, Washington Post,
Harvard, and Kaiser Family Foundation polls

group that has been strong eno ugh to place the
group's rights in jeopardy.
No r shou ld any part of society pretend that it is
a lways more tolerant than another. In the 1950s. for
example. ultraconservatives outside the universities

were attacking the rights of professors to say and
teach certain things. In the 1960s and 1970s ultralibera l students and professors inside the universities were attacking the rights of other students and
professors to say certa in things.

Religious Leaders Rally to
Expand Federal Funding
for "Charitable ChOl"ce"

August 28
WASHINGTON

Yesterday an interfaith coal' ,
conducted an all-da
Itlon of religious leaders
called for increased ferdayerl vfi,g,l on Capitol Hill and
' c
,
Programs run by local" rera' und mg
lor antipoverty
re IglOUScongregations, , ,

MEMORANDUM
To: Represen tative Heidi Unruh
From: Ron Sider, chief of staff
Subject: Charitable Ch oice Expansion A ct
Section 104 of the 1996 federal welfare reform law encouraged states to utilize "faithbased organizations " as providers of federal welfare services . Known as Charitable
Choice, the law prohibits participating organizations from discriminating against
beneficiaries on the basis of religion but permits them to control "the definition,
development, practice, and expression" of their religious convictions . The proposed
act would expand Charitable Choice to crime prevention and other areas.
Arguments for:
1. Over 90 percent of Americans believe in God, and 80 percent favor government
funding for faith-based social programs.
2. Local religious groups are the main nongovernmental providers of social services in
poor urban neighborhoods. The primary beneficiaries of faith -based programs are
needy neighborhood children who are not affiliated with any congregation .
3. 50 long as the religious organizations serve civic purposes and do not proselytize,
the law is constitutional.
Arguments against:
1. Americans are a richly religious people precisely because we have never mixed
church and state in th is way.
2. Community-serving religious groups succeed because over 97 percent of their
funding is private and they can flexibly respond to people's needs without
government or other interference.
3. Constitutional or not, the law threatens to undermine both church and state:
Children will have religion slid (if not jammed) down their throats, and religious
leaders will be tempted to compromise their convictions ,
Your decision:
Favor expansion _ __
Oppose expansion _ _ _ _

Summary

Figure 4.6

Changes in Levels of Political Tolerance, 1930-1999

100

Q U ESTION

There 's always much discussion about
the qualifications of presidential
candidates - their education, age,
race, religion, and the like. If your party
nominated a generally well-qualified
person for president who happened to
be a (name of group), would you vote
for that person?

80
<f>

'"

>,

~

'"
<f>

60

0
.<::

s:

'"00
'"
C
u
:u'"

40

a..

20

-

Catholic

-

Jew

-

Woman

-

Blac k
Athe ist
Homosexua l

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Sources: Gallup poll data, va rious years, as compiled by Professor John Za ller, Depart ment of Political
Science, UCLA; The Gallup Organization, Poll Releases (March 29, 1999),2-6.

*
T

SUMMARY

he American system of government is supported by a political culture that fosters a sense of
civic duty. takes pride in the nation's constitutional
arrangements. and prov ides support for the exercise
of essen tial civil liber ties (albeit out of indifference or
diversity more than principle at times) . In recent
decades mistrust of government officials (though not
of the system itself) has increased, and confidence in
their responsiveness to popular feelings has declined .
Although America ns value liberty in both the
political system and the economy, they believe equality is importa nt in the political realm. In economic
affairs they wish to see equa lity of opportunity but
accept ineq uali ty of results.
Not only is our culture generally supportive of
democratic rule. it also h as certain distinctive features that make our way of governing different from
what one find s in other democracies. Americans
are preoccupied with their rights , and this fact. com-

bined with a political system that (as we shall see)
en courages th e vigorous exe rcise of rights and
claims. gives to our politica l life an adversarial style.
Unlike Swedes or Japanese, we do not generally reach
political decisions by consensus, and we often do
not defer to the a uthority of administrative agencies.
American politics, more tha n that of ma ny other
nations. is shot through at every stage with protracted conflict.
But as we shall learn in the next chapter, that conflict is not eaSily described as always pitting liberals
against conservatives. Not only do we have a lot of
conflict. it is often messy conflict, a kin d of political
Tower of Babel. Foreign observers sometimes ask
how we stand the confusion. The a nswer, of course,
is that we have been doing it for over two hundred
years. Maybe our Constitution is two centuries old
not in spite of this confusion bu t because of it. We
shall see.

95

96

Chapter 4

American PoLiticaL Culture

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?
1. Do Americans trllst tlleir governlllent?
More than it sometimes appears. Compared to the
1950s. we are much less li kely to think that the government does the right thing or cares what we think.
But when we look at our system of government- the
Constitution and our political culture- we are very
pleased with it. Americans are much more patriotic
than people in many other democracies. And we displaya great deal of support for churches in large
measure because we are more reli gious than most
Europeans.

2. Wily do we accept great differences ill wealtll
al/d iI/com e?
We beli eve in equality of opportunity and not equality of result. Wealthy people may have more political
influence than ordinary folks . but if we think that
they earned their money through their own efforts
and if they follow legal rules. we have no co mplaint
about their wea lth.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. Why does 0111' government behave differently
than governments in countries with similar
constitutions?
Our political culture has imbued it with more tolerance and a greater respect for orderly procedures and

personal rights than ca n be found in nations with
constitutions IU<e ours. We are willing to let whoever
wins an election govern without putting up a fuss.
and our military does not intervene.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

Polli ng organizations that frequently measure
aspects of political culture:

www.roper.com
www.gallup.com
U.S. Census Bureau: www.census.gov

SUGGESTED READINGS
Almond . Gabrie l. and Sidn ey Verba. Til e Civic Cll /tlire. Princeton.
N.J.: Prin ceton University Press. 1963. A survey of the political cultures of nve nations-th e United States. Germany. Great
Britain. Ita ly. and Mex ico-as th ey were in 19 59.
Fiorina. Morris. Cli/[lire War? Til e My til of II Polarized Alllerica. New
York: Pea rso n Lon gman. 2004. Argu es that Ameri ca n s are
n ot deeply polarized in th eir politi ca l views.
Hartz. Louis. Til e LiiJeral Traditioll ill AllleriCl/. New York: Harco urt
Brace jovanovic h. 1955. A stimulatin g interpretation o f
American politica l thou ght s in ce th e Poundin g. empha sizin g
th e notion of a liberal co nsensus.
Lipset. Sey mour Martin. Til e First New Natioll. Rev. cd. Ne w Yo rk:
orton. 1979 . How the ori gin s of American soc iety gave ri se
to th e partially co mpetin g va lu es of equali ty and achievement
a nd th e ways in whic h th ese va lu es sh ape politi cal in stituti ons.
McClosky. Herbert. and Alid a Bril l. Dilllell sioll s oj Tole/'{I/Ice: Wlw(
Al/leriCflIlS Believe AiJoliL Civil Uberties. New York: Ru ssell Sage
Foundation . 198 3 . How- and whether-different kinds of
America ns lea rn politi ca ltolcra n ce.

McClosky. Herbert. and john Za ll er. Tile Alll ericlIIl Et ll os: Pllblic
Attitlldes Toward CaJlita lisll/ alld Dell/ ocrac!!. Ca mbridge: Harvard University Press. 19 84 . Study of th e ways in which
Ameri ca ns evaluate po liti ca l and economi c arrangements.
Nye. joseph S.. Philip D. Zelikow. and David C. Kin g. Why People
VOII't T/'II sL GaveI'll/lien/. Ca mbridge: Harvard Un iversity Press.
1997. An effort 10 ex plain di strust.
Putnam. Robert D. Bow/ill!J A 10111': Til e Col/aJlse alld Reviva l oj Alllericall COIIIIIIII/liL!!. New Yo rk: Simon & Schuster. 2000. An
important argul1l e ntthat Amer ica n politica l c ulture ha s been
harmed by th e declin e in membership in organization s that
bring peo pl e togeth er lo r co mmunal activi ti es.
Tocqu cv ille. Alex is de. Vell /Ocf(/c!I ill AII/erica. Edited by Phillips
Bradley. 2 vols. New Yo rk: Knopf. 1951. First publi shed in
1835- 1840. this was and rema in s the greatest sin gle interpretation of American po liti ca l cu lture.
Verba. Sid ney. a nd Gary R. Orre ll. !!l/llalily ill AII/erica: Til e View
./i-0I11 tile 'l'op . Cambridge: Harva rd lJ niversily Press. 19 85 . Eli te
views on politi ca l and econ omi c equality.

CHAPTER

5

Civil Liberties

Culture and Civil Liberties
Rights in Conflict • Cultural Conflicts
• Applying the Bill of Rights to
the States

Interpreting and Applying the First
Amendment
Speech and National Security

What Is Speech?
Libel •

Obscenity •

Who Is a Person?

Symbolic Speech

Church and State
The Free-Exercise Clause •
The Establishment Clause

Crime and Due Process
The Exclusionary Rule • Search
and Seizure • Confessions and
Self-Incrimination • Relaxing the
Exclusionary Rule • Terrorism and
Civil Liberties

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

Why do the courts play so large a
role in deciding what our civil liberties should be?

2.

3.

D

Why not display religious symbols on
government property?
If a person confesses to committing
a crime, why is that confession
sometimes not used in court?
Does the Patriot Act reduce our
liberties?

ogs trained to sniff out drugs go down your high schoo l corridors and
detect marijuana in some lockers. The school a uthorities open and
search your locker without permission or a court order. You are expelled
from school without any hearing. Have your liberties been violated?
Angry at what you consider unfair treatment, you decide to wear a cloth
American flag sewn to the seat of your pants. and your fellow students
decide to wear black armbands to class to protest how you were treated. The
police arrest you for wearing a nag on your seat, and the school punishes
your classmates for wearing armbands contrary to school regulations. Have
your liberties. or theirs, been violated?
You go into federal court to find out. We cannot be certain how the court
would decide the issues in this particular case, but in similar cases in the
past the courts have held that school authorities can use dogs to detect
drugs in schoo ls and that these officials can conduct a "reasonable" search
of you and your effects if they have a "reasonable suspicion" that you are
violating a school rule. But they cannot punish your classmates for wearing
black armbands. they cannot expel you without a hearing, and the state
cannot make it illegal to treat the nag "contemptuously" (by sew ing it to the
seat of your pants, for example). 1
Your claim that these actions violated your constitutional rights would
have astonished the Framers of the Constitution. They thought that they
had written a document that stated what the federal government could do,
not one that specified what state governments (such as school systems)
couldl1ot do. And they thought that they had created a national government
of such limited powers that it was not even necessary to add a list- a bill of
rights-stating what that government was forb idden from doing. It would
be enough, for examp le, that the Constitution did not authorize the federal
government to censor newspapers; an amendment prohibiting censorship
would be superfluo us.
The people who gathered in the state ratifying conventions weren't so
optimistic. They suspected- rightly, as it turned out- that the federal government might well try to do things that it was not authorized to do, and so
they insisted that the Bill of Rights be added to the Constitu tion. But even
they never imagined that the Bill of Rights would affect what state governments could do . Each state would decide that for itself, in its own constitution. And if by chance the Bill of Rights did apply to the states. surely its
guarantees of free speech and freedom from unreasonable searches and

98

Culture and Civil Liberties
seizures would apply to big issues-the freedom to
attack the government in a newspaper editorial. for
example. or to keep the police from breaking down
the door of your home without a wa rra nt. The
courts would not be deciding who could wear what
kinds of armbands or under what circumsta nces a
school could expel a student.
Civil liberties are the protections the Constitution
provides against the abuse of government power by.
for example. censoring your speech. Civil ri ghts. to be
discussed in the next chapter. usually refers to protecting certain groups. such as women. gays. and
African Americans. against discrimination. In practice. however. there is n o clear line between civil liberties and civil rights. For example. is the right to an
abortion a civil liberty or a civil righ t? In this chapter.
we take a look at ii.-ee speech . free press. religious freedom. a nd the ri ghts of the accused. In the next one
we look at discrimination and abortion.

fr Culture and Civil Liberties
Rights in Conflict
We often think of "civil liberties" as a set of principl es
that protect the freedoms of all of us all of th e time.
That is true-up to a point. But in fact the Co nstitution and the Bill of Rights co ntain a li st of competing
rights and duties. That competition becomes obvious
when one person asserts one constitutional right or
duty and another person asserts a different one. For
example:
• Dr. Samuel H. Sheppard of Clevela nd . Ohio. asserted his right to have a fair trial on the charge of having murdered his wife. Bob Considine and Walter
Winchell . two radio commentators. as well as
other reporters. asserted their right to broadcast
whatever facts and rumors they heard about Dr.
Sheppard a nd his love life. Two rights in conflict.
• The U. S. government has an obligation to "provide
for the common defense" and . in pursuit of that
duty. has claimed the right to keep secret certain
military and diplomatic information. The New
York Times claimed the right to publish such
secrets as the "Pentagon Papers" without censorship. citing the Constitution's guarantee of freedom of the press. A duty and a right in conflict.
• Carl Jacob Kunz delivered infl a mma tory a ntiJewish speeches on the street corners of a Jewish neighborhood in New York City. suggesting.

among other things. that Jews be "burnt in incinerators. " The Jewish people living in that area
were outraged. The New York police commissioner revoked Kunz's license to hold public meetin gs
on the streets . When he continued to air his views
on the public streets. Kunz was arrested for speaking without a permit. Freedom of speech versus
the preservation of public order.
Even a disruptive high school student's right not
to be a victim of arbitrary or unjustifiable expulsion
is in partial conflict with th e school's obligation to
maintain an orderly environment in which learning
can take place.
PoLitical struggles over civil Liberties follow much the
same pattern as interest group poLitics invol ving economic issues. even though the claims in question are
made by individu als. Indeed. there are formal . organized interest groups concerned with civil liberties. The
Fraternal Order of the Police complains about restrictions on police powers. whereas the American Civil
Liberties Union defends and seeks to enlarge those
restrictions. Catholics have pressed for public support of
parochial schools; Protestants and Jews have argued
against it. Sometimes the opposed groups are entirely
private; sometimes one or both are government agencies. Often their clashes end up in the courts. (When the
Supreme Court decided the cases given earlier. Sheppard. the New York Times. and Kunz all won. 2)

A 19 19 cartoon expresses popular jears of "Reds" (that
is. lefti st radicals) threatening American institutions.

99

100

Chapter 5

Civil Liberties

War has usually been the crisis that has restricted
the liberty of some minority. For example:

ed (and sometimes inaccurate) cla ims that Soviet
agents were working inside the U.S. government.

The Sedition Act was passed in 1798, making it a
crime to write, utter, or publish "any false, scandalous, and malicious writing" with the intention
of defaming the president, Congress, or the government or of exciting against the government
"the hatred of the people, " The occasion was a
kind of half-war between the United States and
France, stimulated by fear in this country of the
violence following the French Revolution of
1789, The policy entrepreneurs were Federalist
politicians who believed that Thomas Jefferson
and his followers were supporters of the French
Revolution and would, if they came to power,
encourage here the kind of anarchy that seemed
to be occurring in France,
The Espionage and Sedition Acts were passed in
1917-1918 , making it a crime to utter false statements that would interfere with the American
military, to send through the mails material "advocating or urging treason, insurrection, or forcible
resistance to any law of the United States," or to
utter or write any disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or
abusive language intended to incite resistance to
the United States or to curtail war production. The
occasion was World War I; the impetus was the fear
that Germans in this country were spies and that
radicals were seeking to overthrow the government. Under these laws more than two thousand
persons were prosecuted (about half were convicted) , and thousands of aliens were rounded up and
deported. The policy entrepreneur leading this massive crackdown (the so-called Red Scare) was Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer.
The Smith Act was passed in 1940, the Internal
Security Act in 1950. and the Communist Control
Act in 1954. These laws made it illegal to advocate
the overthrow of the U.S. government by force or
violence (Smith Act). required members of the
Communist Party to register with the government
(Internal Security Act). and declared the Communist Party to be part of a conspiracy to overthrow
the government (Communist Control Act). The
occasion was World War II and the Korean War.
which, like earlier wars. inspired fears that foreign
agents (Nazi and Soviet) were trying to subvert the
government. For the latter two laws the policy
entrepreneur was Senator Joseph McCarthy, who
attracted a great deal of attention with his repeat-

These laws had in common an effort to protect the
nation from threats. real and imagined, posed by
people who claimed to be exercising their freedom to
speak. publish, organize. and assemble. In each case
a real threat (a war) led the government to narrow
the limits of permissible speech and activity. Almost
every time such restrictions were imposed . the
Supreme Court was called upon to decide whether
Congress (or sometimes state legislatures) had drawn
those limits properly. In most instances the Court
tended to uphold the legislatures. But as time passed
and the war or crisis ended. popular passions abated
and many of the laws proved to be unimportant.
Though it is uncommon, some use is still made of
the sedition laws. In the 1980s various white
supremacists and Puerto Rican nationalists were
charged with sed ition. In each case the government
alleged that the accused had not only spoken in favor
of overthrowing the government but had actually
engaged in violent actions such as bombings. Later
in this chapter we shall see how the Court has
increasingly restricted the power of Congress and
state legislatures to outlaw political speech; to be
found guilty of sedition now it is usually necessary to
do something more serious than just ta lk about it.

o

o

o

Cultural Conflicts
In the main the United States was originally the creation of white European Protestants. Blacks were, in
most cases, slaves, and American Indians were not
citizens. Catholics and Jews in the colonies composed
a small minority. and often a persecuted one. The
early schoo ls tended to be religious- that is. Protestant- ones, many of them receiving state aid. It is not
surprising that under these circumstances a view of
America arose that equated 'i\mericanism" with the
values and habits of white Anglo-Saxon Protestants.
But immigration to this country brought a flood
of new settlers. many of them coming from very different backgrounds (see Figure 5.1). In the midnineteenth century the potato famine led millions of
Irish Catholics to migrate here. At the turn of the century religious persecution and economic disadvantage brought more millions of people. many Catholic
or Jewish, from southern and eastern Europe.
In recent decades political conflict and economic
want have led Hispanics (mostly from Mexico but
increasingly from all parts of Latin America) .

101

Culture and Civil Liberties

Figure 5.1

Annu al Immigration. 1840-1996

1,900
1,800
1,700
1,600
1,500
1,400
1,300

Vi
"0

Immigration
and Reform
and Contro l
Act of 1986

1,200

c

'"<n::>

1,100

:5

1,000

0

c

World War I

<n

900

'"

800

E

700

I

C
.~

.§

600

Great potato
famine

500

Pan ic
of 1873

i

Postwar flood

l

Cuban and
Hait ian
refugeesi
Indochina
refu gees -

Quotas
- a ppl ied
Quota

400
300
200
100

1840

1850

1860

1870

1880

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Note: Figures for 1989 and 1990 include perso ns w ho were granted permanent residence under the legalization program of th e Immigration and Reform and Control Act of 1986.
Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1998, 10

Caribbeans. Africans, Midd le Easterners, Southeast
Asians, and As ians to cross our borders-some lega lly, some illega lly. Amo ng them have been Buddh ists,
Catholi cs, Mus lims. and members of many other reli gious an d cu ltural groups.
Ethni c, religious, a nd cul tura l differences have
given ri se to different views as to the mea ning a nd
scope of certa in constitutiona lly protected freedoms.
For exa mple:
• Many Jewish groups flnd it offensive for a creche
(that is, a scene depicting the birth of Christ in a
manger) to be displayed in front of a government
building such as city hall at Christmastime, while
many Catholics and Protestants regard such displays
as an important part of our cultural heritage. Does a
reUgious display on public property violate the First
Amendment requirement that the govern ment pass
no law "respecting an establishment of religion"?

• Many English-speaking people believe that the
public sch oo ls ought to teach all students to speak
and write English , because the la nguage is part
of our nation's cultural heritage. Some Hispanic
groups argue that the sch oo ls should teach pupils
in both English and Spanish. since Spanish is part
of the Hispani c cultura l heritage. Is bilingua l education constitutiona lly req uired?
• The Boy Sco uts of America refuses to a llow
homosexual men to become scou t leaders even
though federa l law says that homosexual s may
not be the victims of discrimination. Ma ny civil
libertarians and homosexuals cha llenged this policy beca use it discrimina ted against gays, while
the Boy Scouts defended it because th eir organ ization was a private association free to make its
ow n rules. (The Supreme Co urt in 2000 upheld
the Boy Sco uts on the ground s of their right to
assoc iate freely.)

2000

10 2

Chapter 5

Civil Liberties

Even within a given cultural tradition there are
important differences of opinion as to the ba lance
between communi ty sensitivities a nd persona l selfexpression. To some people the sight of a store car rying porn ographic books or a theater show in g a
pornographic mov ie is deeply offensive; to others
pornography is offen sive but such establishments
ought to be tolerated to ensure that laws restrictin g
them do not a lso restrict politically or artistica lly
important forms of speech : to still others pornog raphy itself is not especially offensive. What forms of
expression are enti tled to constitutional protection ?

Applying the Bill of Rights to the States
For ma ny years after the Constitution was signed a nd
the Bill of Rights was added to it as a mendments. the
liberti es th ese documents stated applied only to the
federa l government. The Supreme Court made this
clea r in a case dec ided in 183 3 .3 Except for Articl e I
which. among other things. banned ex post Jacto laws
and guaran teed th e right of habeas corpus. the Constitution was silent on what the states could not do to
their residents.
This bega n to change after the Civil War when new
amendments were ratified in order to ba n slavery a nd
protect new ly freed slaves. The Fourteenth Amendment. ratified in 1868. was the most important addition. It said that no state shall "deprive any person of
life. liberty. or property without due p r ocess of law "
(a phrase now known as the "due process clause")
a nd that no state sha ll "deny to a ny person within its
jurisdiction the equal protection of th e laws " (a
phrase now known as the "eq ual protection clause").
Beginning in 1897. the Supreme Court star ted to
use these two phrases as a way of applying certa in
rights to state governments. It first said th at no state

due process of law

Denies th e government
the right, without du e process, to depri ve people of lif e, liberty, and property.
equal protection of the law A standard of
equal t re atment that must be observed by th e
government.
selective incorporation Cou rt ca ses t hat
apply Bill of Rights t o states.
freedom of expression Ri ght of peo ple t o
speak, publish, and assembl e.
freedom of religion Peop le shall be free to
exercise thei r relig ion, and governm ent may
not esta blish a re lig io n.

could take private property without paying just compensation. a nd then in 19 25 held. in the Citlow case
that the federa l gua ra ntees of free speech and free
press a lso applied to the states. 4 ln 1937 it went much
further and said in Palko v. COllI zeCtiCut that certa in
rights should be applied to the states beca use. in th e
Court's words. they "represented the very essence of a
scheme of ordered liberty" and were "princip!cs of
justice so rooted in the traditions a nd conscience of
our people as to be ranked fund amenta L" 5
In these cases, the Supreme Co urt bega n the
process of selective incorporation by which some.
but not all. federal rights a lso applied to thc states.
But which rights are so "fundamental" that they
ought to govern the states? There is no entirely clear
a nswer to this question. but in genera l the entire Bill
of Rights is now app lied to the states except for the
follow in g:
• The right to bear a rms (Second Amendmcnt)
• Th e right not to h ave soldiers forcibly qua rtered in
priva te homes (Third Amendment)
• Th e right to be indicted by a gra nd jury before
being tried for a seriou s crime (F ifth Amendment)
• The righ t to a jury tri a l in civil cases (Seventh
Amendment)
• The ban on excess ive bai l a nd fin es (E ig hth
Amendment)
And as we sha ll see. when the Court creates a new
right. such as the right to "privacy." the justices have
applied it to both state and nationa l governments.

'- Interpreting and Applying
the First Amendment
The First Amendment conta ins the language that
has been at issue in most of the cases to which we
have thus fa r referred. It has rou gh ly two parts: one
protecting fr eedom of expression ("Congress sha ll
make no law .. . abridging the freedom of speech , or
of th e press. or th e right of people peaceably to
assemble. a nd to petition the government for a
redress of grieva nces") a nd th e other protecting
freedom of reli gion ("Congress sha ll ma ke no law
respecting a n establishment of religion: or abrid ging
the free exercise thereof" ).

Speech and National Security
The traditiona l view of free speech a nd a free press
was expressed by Will ia m Blackston e. the grea t Eng-

Illterpreting and App l yi ng the First Amendment

LANDMARK CASES
Incorporation
• Gitlow v. New York (1925): Supreme Court says the First Amendment applies to states.
• Palko v. Connecticut (1937): Supreme Court says that states must observe all
" fundamental" liberties.

lish jurist, in his COl1l l1l entaries, published in 1765. A
free press is essentia l to a free state, he wrote. but the
freedom that the press should enjoy is the freedom
from prior r estraint- that is. freedom from censorship. or rules telling a newspaper in advance what it
can publish. Once a newspaper has published an
article or a person has delivered a speech. that paper
or speaker has to take the conseq uences if what was
written or said proves to be "improper. mischievous.
or ill egal. '·6
The U.S. Sedition Act of 1798 was in keeping with
traditional English law. Like it. the act imposed no
prior restraint on publishers: it did. however. make
them liable to punishment after the fact. The act was
an improvement over the English law. however.
because unlike the British model. it entr usted the
decision to a jury, not a judge. and allowed the defendant to be acquitted if he or she could prove the truth
of what had been published. Although several newspaper publishers were convicted under the act. none
of these cases reached the Supreme Court. When
Jefferson became president in 1801. he pardoned
everyone wh o had been convicted under the Sedition
Act. Though Jeffersonians obj ected vehemently to
the law. their principa l objection was not to the idea
of hold ing newspapers acco untable for what they
published but to letting the Jederal government do
this. Jefferson was perfectly prepared to have the
states punish what he called the "overwhelming torrent of slander " by means of "a few prosecutions of
the most prominent offenders. "7
it would be another century before the federal
government would attempt to define the limits of free
speech and writing. Perhaps recalling the widespread opposition to the sweep of the 1798 act. Congress in 1917- 1918 placed restrictions not on
publications that were critical of the government but

on ly on those that advocated "treason. insurrection.
or forci ble resistance" to federal laws or attempted to
foment disloyalty or mutiny in the armed services.
In 1919 this new law was exam ined by the
Supreme Court when it heard the case of Cha rles T.
Schenck, who had been convicted of violating the
Espionage Act because he had ma iled circu lars to
men eligible for the draft. urging them to resist. At
issue was the constitutiona li ty of the Espionage Act
and , more broad ly. the scope of Congress's power to
control speech. One view held that the first Amendment preve nted Congress from passing any law
restricting speech: the other held that Congress could
punis h dangerous speech. For a unanimous Supreme
Court. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes announced a
rule by wh ich to settle the matter. it soon became
known as the c1ear-and-present-dange r test:
The question in every case is whether the words
used are used in such circumstances and are of
such a nature as to create a clear a nd present
danger that they will bring about the substantive ev ils that Congress has a right to prevent. s
The Court held th at Schenck's leaflets did create
such a danger, and so his conviction was upheld. In
explaining why. Holmes said that not even the Constitution protects a person who has been "falsely
shouting fire in a theatre and causing a panic." In
this case things that might safely be said in peacetime
may be punished in wartime.

prior restraint Censorship of a publi cat ion.
clear-and-present-danger test Law should
not pu nish speech unless there w as a cl ear and
prese nt danger of produ cing harmful acti ons .

103

104

Chapter 5

Civil Liberties

MR. PRESIDENT
REMEMBER THE CONSTITUnON
'CONGRESS SHAll MAKE NO LAW-'ABRIDGING TilE FREEDOM OF SPEECH.
OR OF THE PRESS':: THE POUTICAL
PRISONERS WHO BREIVED IN THIS
GUARANTEE. ARE NOW SERVING 20
YEARS IN PRISON

•

•

Women picketed in ji'ont of tile W IIi te HOLlse. urgillg President
Wa rren Ha rding to release political radicals arrested during his
administration.

The clear-and-present-da nger test may have cla rified the law, but it kept no one ou t of jail. Schenck
went, a nd so did the defenda nts in five other cases
in the period 1919- 1927, eve n though during thi s
time Ho lmes. the author of the test. shifted his position a nd began writin g dissenting opinions in which
he urged that the test had not been met a nd so the
defendant should go free.
In 192 5 Benj a min Gitlow was convicted of violating New York's sedi tion law-a law simil ar to the
fede ra l Sedi tion Act of 1918- by passing out some
lea nets. The Sup reme Co ur t u pheld hi s conviction
but added, as we have seen. a statement that cha nged
co nstitutiona l history: freedom of speech and of the
press were now a mong the "fund amental personal
rights" protected by tb e due-process cla use of tbe
Fo urteen th Amendment fro m infringements by state
action .9 Therea fter state laws involving speech. the
press, a nd peaceful assembly were struck down by
the Supreme Co ur t for being in violation of the
freedom-or-expressio n gu a ra ntees of th e First
Amendm ent. made a pplicable to the states by th e
Fourteenth Amendment. 10
The clear-a nd-present-d a nger test was a way of
bala ncing the competin g demands of free expression

a nd nation a l security. As the memory of World Wa r
I and the ens uing Red Scare eva porated, the Co urt
began to develop other tests. on es that shifted the ba la nce more toward free ex pression. Some of these
tests are listed in tb e box on page 107.
Bu t wben a crisis reappears, as it did in World War
II a nd the Korea n conflict. the Co urt has tended to
defer. up to a point, to legislative judgments about the
need to protect nationa l security. For exampl e. it
upheld the co nviction of eleven leaders of the Co mmuni st Party for hav in g advoca ted tbe violent overthrow of the U.S. government, a violation of the
Smitb Act of ] 940 .
This convicti on once again raised the hard question of the circumstances under which words can be
punished. Hardly a nybody would deny that actu ally
trying to overthrow the government is a crime; tbe
questi on is whether advocating its over tb row is a
crime. In th e case of the eleven co mmuni st leaders.
the Co urt sa id that the government did not have to
wait to protect itself until "the putsch [rebellion] is
about to be executed. the pl a ns have been laid and the
signa l is awa ited." Even if the communists were not
likely to be successful in their effo rt, tb e Court held
that specifi ca lly advocatin g violent over throw co uld
be punished. "In each case," the opinion read, the
courts "must ask whether the gravity of the 'evil ,' discounted by its improbabili ty, justifies such invas ion o[
free speech as is necessary to avoid the danger. " I J
Bu t as the popul ar wor ries about communists
bega n to subsid e a nd t he membershi p o[ the
Supreme Court cha nged, tbe Court began to tip the
bala nce even fa rther towa rd free expression. By
195 7 tbe Court made it clear that for advocacy to be
punished, tb e government would have to show not
just tbat a person beli eved in tbe overthrow of th e
government but also that he or sh e was using word s
"calculated to incite" that overtbrow. 12
By 1969 the pendulum had sw ung to the point
where the speech would have to be judged likely to
incite "imminent" unlawful acti on . In this case
Cla rence Bra ndenburg, a lea der of the Ku Klux Kla n
in Obi o, staged a cross-bu rn ing ra lly during wbicb
he rev iled bl acks a nd Jews. The police told him to
clea r the street; as he left. he sa id, "We' ll take the
[ex pletive] street later. " He was co nvicted of attemptin g to in cite lawless mob action. The Supreme Court
overturned the co nviction. holding tb at a ny speecb
that does not ca ll for ill ega l actio n is protected, a nd
even speech that does ca ll [or illegal action is protect-

What Is Speech?
ed if the action is not "imminent" or there is reason
to believe that the listeners will not take action.13
This means tha t no matter how offe nsive or
provocative some forms of expression may be. this
expression has powerful constitutional protecti ons.
In 1977 a group of America n Nazis wanted to
parade through the streets of Skokie. Illinois. a community wi th a la rge Jew ish population. The res idents. outraged. sought to ban the ma rch. Ma ny
feared violence if it occurred. But the lower courts,
under prodding from the Supreme Co urt, held that.
noxious and provocative as the anti-Semitic slogans
of the Nazis may be. the Nazi party had a constitutional right to speak and parade peacefully. 14
Simil ar reasoning led the Supreme Court in 1992
to overturn a Minnesota statute that made it a crime
to display symbols or objects. such as a Nazi swastika
or a burning cross. that are lil(ely to cause ala rm or
resentment among an ethnic or racial group. such as
Jews or African Americans.1 5 On the other hand . if
you are convicted of actually hurting someone. you
may be given a tougher sentence if it can be shown
that you were motivated to assa ult them by racial or
ethnic h atred. 16 To be punished for such a hate
crime. your bigotry must result in some direct and
physical harm and not just the display of an od ious
symbol.

-p.. What Is Speech?
If most politica l spea king or writing is permissible.
save that which actually incites someone to take illegal actions. what killds of speakin g a nd wri ti ng qualify for this broad protection? Though the Constitution
says that the legislature may make "no law " abridging freedom of speech or the press. and although
some justices have argued that this mea ns literally 110
law. the Court has held that there are at least four
forms of speaking and writing that are not automatica lly gra nted full constitutional protection: libel.
obscenity. symbolic speech. and false advertising.

Libel
A libel is a written statement that defames the character of another person. (If the sta tement is oral. it is
called a slander.) In some co untries, such as England.
it is easy to sue another person for libel and to collect.
In thi s co untry it is much ha rder. For one thing. yo u
must show that the libelous statement was false. If it

A Ku Klu x Klan lIIellliJer uses his constitutiollal right to
F ee speech to utter "white power" challts ill Skokie. Illinois.

was true. you cannot collect no matter how badly it
harmed you.
A beau ty contest winner was awarded $ 14 million (l ater reduced on appeal) when she proved that
Penthouse magazine had libeled her. The actress Carol
Burnett co llected a large sum from a libel suit
brought against a gossip news paper. But wh en
Theodore Roosevelt sued a newspaper [or fal sely
claiming that he was a drunk. the jury awarded him
damages of only six cents. 17
If yo u are a public figure. it is much h arder to win
a libel suit. A public fi gure such as an elected official.
an army general. or a well-know n celebrity must
prove not only that the publication was false and
damaging but also th at the words were published
with "actual malice"- that is. with reckless disregard for their truth or fal sity or with knowledge that
they were falseJ H General Ariel Sharon was able to
prove that the statements made about him by Time
magazine were false and damaging but not that they
were the res ult of "actual malice."

Obscenity
Obscenity is not protected by the First Amendmen t.
The Court ha s always held that obscene materials.
because they have no redeeming social va lue a nd are

libel

Writing that falsely injures another
person .

105

106

Chapter 5

Civil Liberties

ca lculated chiefly to appea l to one's sexual rather
than poli tical or literar y interests. can be regul ated
by the state. The pro blem, of course, arises with the
meaning of obscene. In the eleven-year period from
1957 to 1968 the Court decided th irteen major cases
invo lvin g the definition of obscenity, which resulted
in fifty-five separate opinion s.19 Some justices, such
as Hugo Black, believed that the First Amendment
protected all publications, even wholly obscene ones.
Oth ers believed th at obscenity deserved no protection a nd struggled heroica lly to define the term . Still
others sha red the view of former Ju sti ce Potter
Stewart, who obj ected to "hard-core porn ography"
but admitted that the best defini tion he co uld offer
was "1 know it when I see it." 20
It is un necessa ry to rev iew in detail th e ma ny
attempts by the Co urt at def1ning obscenity. Th e justices have made it cl ear that nudity an d sex are not,
by defi nition. obscene and that they will provide First
Am endment protection to anything tha t has politica l. literary, or arti stic merit, a ll owing the government to punish only the distribution of "h a rd-core
pornogra phy." Their most recent definition of this is
as follows: to be obscen e. the work, taken as a whole,
must be judged by "the average person applyin g contemporary community sta ndards " to appea l to the
"prurient interest" or to depi ct "in a patently offensive way, sexu a l conduct speCifi ca lly defin ed by applicable state law" and to lack "serious literary, artistic,
politica l, or scientifi c va lue. "21
After Alba ny, Georgia, decided that the movie Carnal Knowledge was obscene by co ntempora ry local
stand a rd s, the Supreme Co urt over turned the distribu tor's co nviction on the ground s that the au thorities in Alba ny fa il ed to show that the film depicted
"patently offensive hard-core sexua l conduct. "n
It is easy to m a ke sport of the problems the Co urt
has faced in trying to decide obscenity cases (one
conjures up images of bl ack-robed justices leailng
thro ugh the pages of Hu stler magazine, taking
notes), bu t these problems revea l. as do oth er civil
liberties cases, the continuing problem of ba la nCing
competing claims. One part of the communi ty wants
to read or see wh atever it wishes; another part wants
to protect private acts 11"om public degradation. Th e
first part cherishes liber ty above all; the seco nd values decency above liberty. The former fears that any
restriction on literature will lead to pervasive restrictions: the latter believes that reaso nable people ca n
distinguish (or reasonable laws ca n requi re them to

distinguish) between patently offensive a nd ar tistically serious work.
Anyone strolling today throu gh a n "adult" bookstore must suppose that no restrictions at a ll exist on
the distribution of pornographic works. This co nclition does not arise simply 11"om the doctrines of the
Court. Other factors operate as well. including the
pri orities of local law enforcement officia ls, the politica l climate of th e com IllU ni ty. the procedures that
must be followed to bring a viable co ur t case, the
clarity a nd workability of state a nd loca l laws on the
subj ect, a nd the diffi culty of changing the behavior
of ma ny people by prosecuting one person. The current view of the Court is th at localiti es can decide for
themselves whether to tolerate ha rd-core po rnography; bu t if they choose not to. they mu st meet some
fairly strict constitutional tests.
The protections given by the Cour t to express ions
of sex ua l or erotic in terest have not been limited to
books. magazines. or films. Almost any form of visua l or a uditory co mmuni cation can be co nsidered
"speech " a nd thus protected by the First Amendment. In on e case even nude dancing was given protecti on as a form of "speech ," 23 a lthough in 199 1
the Court held that nude da ncing was on ly "ma rgina lly" withi n the pur view of First Amendment protections, and so it upheld a n Indi a na sta tute that
ban ned totally nude dancing. 24
Of late some feminist orga nizations have attacked
pornog raphy on the grounds that it expl oits and
degrades women. They persuaded Indianapolis to
pass a n ordina nce that defined pornography as portrayals of the "graphic, sexua lly explicit subordination of women " a nd allowed peo ple to sue the
producers of such material. Sexually explicit portrayals of women in positions of eq uality were not defined
as pornography. The Court disagreed. In 198 6 it
affirm ed a lower-cour t rulin g that such an ordina nce
was a violation of the First Amendmen t because it
represented a legislative preference for one form of
expression (women in positions of equa lity) over
another (women in positions of subordination). 25
One constitutionally permiss ible way to limit the
sprea d of pornographic materia ls has been to establish rules governing where in a city they can be sold.
When one city adopted a zoning ordina nce prohibiting a n "adult" mov ie theater from locating within
one thousand feet of any church. school. par k, or
residential area, the Co urt upheld the ordinance.
noting that the purpose of the law was not to regu-

What Is Speech?

107

HOW THINGS WORK

Testing Restrictions on Expression
The Supreme Court has employed various standards
and tests to decide whether a restriction on freedom
of expression is constitutionally permissible .
1. Preferred position The right of free expression,
though not absolute, occupies a higher, or more
preferred, position than many other constitutional rights, such as property rights . This is still a controversial rule; nonetheless, the Court always
approaches a restriction on expression skeptically.
2. Prior restraint With scarcely any exceptions, the
Court will not tolerate a prior restraint on expression, such as censorship, even when it will allow
subsequent punishment of improper expressions
(such as libel) .
3. Imminent danger Punishment for uttering inflammatory sentiments will be allowed only if there is
an imminent danger that the utterances will incite
an unlawful act.
4. Neutrality Any restriction on speech, such as a
requirement that parades or demonstrations not
disrupt other people in the exercise of their rights,

late speech but to regulate the use of land. And in
any case the ad ult theaters still had much of the
city's la nd area in which to find a location. 26
With the advent of the Internet it has become
more dimcult for the government to regulate obscenity. The Internet spans the globe. It offers an a mazing
variety of materials- some educationa l, some entertaining, some sexua lly exp li cit. But it is dimcult to
apply the Supreme Co urt's sta ndard for judging
whether sexua l material is obscene-the "average
person " app lying "co ntemporary co mmuni ty standards"-to the Internet, because there is no easy
way to tell what "the community" is. Is it the place
where the recipient lives or the place where the
material originates? And since no one is in charge of
the Internet, who can be held responsible for co ntrolli ng offens ive material ? Since anybody ca n send anything to anybody else without knowing the age or

must be neutral-that is, it must not favor one
group more than another.
5. Clarity If you must obtain a permit to hold a
parade, the law must set forth clear (as well as
neutral) standards to guide administrators in issuing that permit. Similarly, a law punishing obscenity must contain a clear definition of obscenity.
6. Least-restrictive means If it is necessary to restrict
the exercise of one right to protect the exercise of
another, the restriction should employ the leastrestrictive means to achieve its end. For example, if
press coverage threatens a person's right to a fair
trial, the judge may only do what is minimally necessary to that end, such as transferring the case to
another town rather than issuing a "gag order."
Cases cited, by item: (1) United States II Carolene Products, 304 U.S.
144 (1938). (2 ) Near II Minnesota, 283 U.S. 697 (1931 ). (3) Brandenburg II Ohio, 395 US 444 (1969) (4) Kunz v New York, 340 U.S. 290
(1951 ). (5) Hynes v Mayor and Council of Oradell, 425 US . 610
(1976). (6) Nebraska Press Association v Stuart, 427 U.S. 539 (1976).

location of the recipient, how ca n the Internet protect children ? When Congress tried to ban obscene,
indecent. or "patently offensive" materials from the
Internet, the Supreme Court struck down the law as
unconstitutional. The Co urt went even further with
child pornograp hy. Though it has long held that
child pornography is illegal even if it is not obscene
because of the government's interest in protecting
children, it wou ld not let Congress ban pornography
involving computer-designed child ren. Under the
1996 law, it would be illegal to disp lay computer
simulations of children engaged in sex even if no rea l
children were involved. The Court sa id "no. " It held
that Congress could not ban "virtua l" child pornog raphy without vio lating the First Amendment
because, in its view, the law might bar even harmless
dep ictions of chil dren and sex (for example, in a book
on child psychol ogy) .27

108

Chapter 5

Civil Liberties
But the Court struck this law down as unconstitutional. 30 Now that it was clea r that only a constitutiona l amendment cou ld make flag-burning illegal.
Co ngress wa s asked to propose one. But it would not.
Ea rli er mem bers of the House and Senate had supported a law ba nning fl ag-burning with over 90 percent of their votes, but when asked to make that law
a co nstitutiona l amendment they could n ot muster
the necessary two-thirds maj orities. The reason is
that Congress is much more reluctant to a mend the
Constitu tion than to pass new laws . Several members decided that flag-burning was wrong, but not so
wrong or so common as to justify an amendment.

"SYIIlIJOlic speeclI ": when youllg melliJllrned tlIeir dmjt cards
durillg tile 1960s to protest ti,e Vietllalll Ww; tile SlIpreme COllrt
ruled that it wns nil illegnl nct lor whicll t1,ey could 1) (' punished.

Symbolic Speech
Yo u cannot ordinar ily claim th at an illega l act
should be protected beca use that action is meant to
co nvey a political message. For exa mpl e, if you burn
your draft card in protest against the foreign policy of
the United States, yo u can be punished for the illega l
act (burning the card), even if' your intent was to
communi cate your beliefs. The Court reasoned that
giving such symbolic sp eech the same protection
as real speech would open the door to permitting a ll
manner of illegal actions- murder, arson. rape- if
the perpetrator meant thereby to send a message. 211
On the other hand. a statute that makes it illega l
to burn the American flag is a n unco nstitutiona l
infringement of f'ree speech.2'! Why is th ere a difference between a draft card and the fla g? The Court
argues that the government has a right to run a military draft and so can protect draft cards. even if this
incidentally restricts speech. But the only motive that
the government has in banning flag-b urning is to
restrict this form of speech. a nd that would make
such a restriction improper.
The American people were outraged by the fl agburning decision. and in response the House and
Senate passed by huge majorities (380 to 38 a nd 91
to 9) a law making it a federal crime to burn the flag.

symbo lic speech
ca l message .

A n act that conveys a po liti-

Who Is a Person?
If people have a right to speak and publish. do corporations. interest groups, and children have the same
right? By and large the answer is yes, though there
arc some exceptions.
When th e attorney general of Massachusetts tried
to prevent the First Nation a l Bank of Boston from
spe nding money to influence votes in a local election ,
the Court stepped in an d blocked him. The Co urt held
that a corporation, like a person. has certain First
Amendment rights. Similarly. when the fed era l government tried to limit the spendin g of a group called
Massachusetts Citizens for Life (a n antiabortion
organization), the Co urt held that such organizations have First Amendment ri ghts. 31 The Co urt has
also told states that they cannot forbid liquor stores
to advertise their prices and inf'ormed fed eral authorities that they cannot prohibit cas in os from plugging
gambling. 32
When the California Public Utility Com mission
tried to compel one of the utiliti es that it regulates, the
Pacinc Gas a nd Electric Company. to enclose in its
monthly bills to customers sta tements written by
groups attack ing the utility. the Supreme Co urt
bl ocked the agency, say ing that forcing it to disseminate politica l statements violated the firm 's free
speech rights. "The identity of the speaker is not decisive in determining whether speech is protected." the
Court said. "Corporations and other associations. like
individuals. contribute to the 'discussion. debate. a nd
the dissemination of information and ideas' that the
First Amen dment seeks to foster." [n this case the
right to speak includes the choice of what 1I0t to say. 33
Eve n t ho ug h corporatio ns have some Fir st
Amendment rights, the government can place more

Who Is a Per son ?

.

LANDMARK CASES

Free Speech and Free Press
• Chaplinksy v. New Hampshire (1942): "Fighting words" are not protected by the First
Amendment.
• Collin v. Smith (1978): The Nazi Party may march through a largely Jewish neighborhood .
• McConnell v. Federal Election Commission (2003): Upholds 2002 campaign finance
reform law.
• Miller v. California (1973): Obscenity defined as appealing to prurient interests of an
average person with mater ials that lack literary, art istic, political, or scientific value.
• New York Times v. Sullivan (1964): To libel a publ ic figu re, there must be "actual malice. "
• Reno v. ACLU (1997): A law that bans sending "indecent" material to minors over the
Internet is unconst itutional because "i ndecent " is too vagu e and broad a term.
• Schenck v. United States (1919): Speech may be punished if it creates a clear-and -presentdanger test of illegal acts.
• Texas v. Johnson (1989): There may not be a law to ban flag -burning.

limi ts o n co mm ercia l than on no ncommercia l
speech . The legislature can place restri ctions on
advertisements for ciga rettes, liquor, a nd gamb ling;
it ca n even regulate advertising for some less h armful
products prov ided that the reg ulations a re nar rowly
ta ilored and ser ve a substantia l public interest. 34 If
the regu lati ons are too broad or do not serve a clea r
interest, then ads a re entitled to some co nstitutiona l
protection. For exa mpl e, the states ca nnot ba r
lawyers fro m adver tising or acco untants from persona lly soliciting cl ients. 35
A big exception to the free-speech righ ts of cor porati ons and labor un ion s groups was imposed by
the McCain -Feingold campa ign fin a nce refo rm law
passed in 2002 . Ma ny groups, ra nging from the
Ameri ca n Civil Liber ties Union a nd the AFL-CIG to
the Nationa l Rifl e Association a nd the Cha mber of
Co mm erce, fe lt th at t he law banned leg itim ate
speech. Under its terms, organizations co uld not pay
for "electioneering commun ica tions " on radi o or telev ision that "refer" to candid ate fo r federa l office
wi thin sixty days before the electio n. But the
Suprem e Co ur t stru ck down these arg ume nts,
uph olding the law in McCollnell v. Federal Electioll
CO/ll/l1ission. The Co urt said that ads th at only mentio ned but did not "expressly advocate" a candid ate

were ways of influencing the electi on. Some dissenting opinion co mpla in ed th at a Co ur t that had once
given free speech protection to nud e dancing ought
to give it to politica l speech. 36 In Cha pter 11 we sha ll
look at this issue more closely.
Under certa in circumsta nces, yo ung people may
have less freedom of expression tha n adul ts . In 1988
the Supreme Co urt held that the principa l of Hazelwood High School cou ld censor articles appea rin g in
the student-edited n ewspaper. The newspaper was
pub lished u sing sch oo l fund s a nd was part of a journa lism class . The principal ordered the deletion of
stories deali ng with studen t pregna ncies an d the
impact of parental divorce on students. The student
editors sued, cl a iming their First Amendment righ ts
h ad been violated. The Co urt ag reed that students do
not "shed their constitutional rights to freedom of
speech or expression at the schoolhouse gate" a nd
th at they cann ot be punished fo r expressing on campus th eir perso na l views. But students do not have
exactly the same rights as adults if the exercise of
those ri gh ts impedes the edu catio na l mission of the
school. Students may lawfu lly say things on campus,
as individua ls, that they cannot say if they a re par t of
school-sponso red activities, such as plays or sch oolrun newspa pers, that are part of the curricu lum.

109

llO

Chapter 5

Civil Liberties

School-sponsored activities can be controlled so long
as the controls are "reasonably related to legitimate
pedagogical concerns." J7

Church and State
Every body knows. correctly, the language of the First
Amendment that protects freedom of speech and the
press. though most people are not aware of how complex the legal interpretations of these provisions h ave
become. But many people also believe. wrongly, that
the language of the First Amendment clearly requires
the "separation of church and state." It does not.
What that amendment actually says is quite different and maddeningly unclear. It has two parts.
The first. often referred to as the free-exercise
clause, states that Congress shall make no law prohibiting the "free exercise" of religion . The second.
which is called the establishment clause, states
that Congress sha ll make no law "respecting an
establishment of religion."

The Free-Exercise Clause
The free-exercise clause is the clearer of the two.
though by no means is it lacking in ambiguity. It
obviously means that Congress cannot pass a law
prohibiting Catholics from celebrating Mass. requiring Baptists to become Episcopalians. or preventing
Jews from holding a bar mitzvah. Since the First
Amendment has been applied to the states via the
due-process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. it
means that state governments cannot pass such laws
either. in general the co urts have treated religion like
speech: you can pretty much do or say what yo u
want so long as it does not ca use some serious harm
to others.
Even some laws that do not appear on their face to
apply to ch urches may be unconstitutional if their
enforcement imposes particular burdens on churches or greater burdens on some churches than others.
For example. a state cannot apply a li cense fee on
free-exercise clause

First Amendment requirement that law cannot prevent free exercise of
religion .
establishment clause First Amendment
ban on laws " respecting an establishment
of religion ."

door-to-door solicitors when the solicitor is a Jehovah's Witness selling religious tracts. 38 By the same
token, the cour ts rul ed that the city of Hialeah,
Florid a, cannot ban animal sacrifices by members
of an Afro-Caribbean religion called Santeria. Since
killin g anima ls is genera lly not illegal (if it were.
there could be no hamburgers or chicken sandwiches served in Hialeah's restaurants, an d rat traps
would be unlawful). the ban in this case was clearly
directed against a specifk religion and hence was
un constitutional. 39
Having the right to exercise your religion freely
does not mean, however. that you are exempt from
laws binding other citizens, even when the law goes
aga inst your religious beliefs. A ma n cannot have
more than one wife. even if (as once was the case
with Mormons) polygamy is thought desirable on
religious grounds. 4o For religious reasons you may
oppose being vaccin ated or having blood transfusions, but if the state passes a compulsory vaccination law or orders that a blood transfusion be given
to a sick child , the courts will not block them on
grounds of religiOUS liberty.41 Similarly, if yo u belong
to an Indian tribe th at uses a drug. peyote. in religious ceremonies. you ca nnot claim that your freedom was abridged if the state decides to ban the use
of peyote, provided the law applies equally to al1. 42
Since airports have a legitimate need for tight security measures. begging can be outlawed in them even
if some of the peopl e doing the begging are part of a
religious group (in this case. the Hare Krishnas).4 3
Unfortunately some confli cts between religious
belief and public policy are even more dirncult to settle. What if you believe on religious gro unds that war
is immoral? The draft laws h ave always exempted a
conscientious objector from military duty, a nd the
Court has uph eld such exemptions. But the Court
has gone further: it has said that people ca nnot be
drafted even if they do not believe in a Supreme
Being or belon g to any religious tradition. so long as
their "consciences, spurred by deeply held moral.
ethical. or religiOUS belief's. would give them no rest
or peace if they allowed themselves to become part of
an instrument of war. "44 Do exemptions on such
grounds create an opportunity for some people to
evade the draft beca use of their political preferences?
In trying to answer such questions. the courts often
have had to try to define a religion- no easy task.
And even when there is no question about your
membership in a bona I1de religion. the circum-

Church and State
stances under which you may claim exemption from
laws that apply to everybody else are not rea lly clear.
What if you. a member of th e Seventh-Day Adventi sts. are fired by your employer for refu sin g on religious grounds to work on Saturday. and then it turn s
out that you cannot collect unemployment in sura nce becau se you refuse to take a n ava ilable jobone that a lso requires you to work on Saturday? Or
wh at if you a re a member of th e Amish sect. whi ch
refu ses. contrary to state law. to send its children to
publi c sch ools past th e eighth grade? The Court has
ruled that th e state mu st pay you un employment
compensation and cannot require you to send your
children to public schools beyond the eighth grad e.45
These la st two decision s. a nd others like them ,
show th at even th e "simpl e" principl e of freedom of
reli gion gets compli ca ted in practice and ca n lead to
th e courts' givin g. in effect. preference to members of
one church over members of an other.

The Establishment Clause
What in the world did the members of the First
Congress mean when they wrote into the First Amendment language prohibitin g Congress from makin g a
law "respectin g" an "establishment" of religion ? The
Supreme Court has more or less con sistently interpreted this vague phrase to mean th at the Constitution
erects a "wa ll of separation" between church and state.
That phrase. so often qu oted. is not in the Bill of
Ri ghts nor in the debates in th e First Congress th at
drafted the Bill of Rights; it comes from the pen of
Th omas Jefferson. who was opposed to having the
Church of Engla nd as th e established church of his
native Virginia. (A t the time of the Revo lution a ry
Wa r th ere were established churches- t hat is. officia l. state-supported churches- in at least eight of
the thirteen former colonies. ) But it is not clear th at
Jefferson 's view was th e majority view.
Durin g much of th e debate in Congress the wording of this part of the First Amendment was quite different and much pl a in er than what fin a lly emerged.
Up to the last minute th e clause wa s intended to rea d
"no religi on sha ll be established by law" or "no
national reli gion sha ll be established." The mea ning
of those words seems qui te clear: whatever th e states
may do. t he federal government cannot create an
offi cial, na tion al religion or give support to on e religion in preference to a nother.46
But Co ngress in stea d adopted an a mbi guou s
phrase. and so the Supreme Court had to decide wh at

1] 1

Students pmlj in f ront of a high school in Virginia. The Supreme
Co urt will not let this happen inside a puhlic school.

it meant. It has decl a red that these words do not simply mea n "no nationa l religion" but mean as well no
governmen t involvement with reli gion at all. even on
a nonpreferenti al bas is. They mea n . in short. erectin g a "wa ll of sepa rati on " between church a nd
state. 4 7 Though the in terpretation of th e establi shmen t clause remains a topic of great controversy
among judges a nd schola rs. the Supreme Court has
more or less co nsisten tly adopted thi s wall-ofseparation prin Cipl e.
Its first statement of thi s interpretation was in
1947. The case invol ved a New Jersey town that
reimbursed pa rents for the costs of tra nsportin g
th eir children to school, including parochi a l (in this
case Ca tholic) school s. The Court decided th at thi s
reimbursement was co nstituti ona l, bu t it made it
clear th at the establi shment cl a use of th e First
Amendment appli ed (via the Fourteenth Amendment) to the states a nd that it mea nt, am ong other
things. t hat the governm ent ca nn ot require a person
to profess a beli ef or disbelief in a ny religion : it ca nnot a id on e religion . some reli gions. or all reli gions;
and it ca nn ot spend any tax mon ey. however small
t he amount mi ght be. in support of any reli giou s
activities or in stitutions.48 The reader may wonder,
in view of th e Court's reasoning. why it allowed th e

wall of separation

Court ruling that govern ment cannot be involved with religion .

112

Chapter 5

Civil UiJerties

town to pay for busing children to Catho lic schoo ls.
The answer th at it gave is that busing is a religiously
neutral activity, akin to providing !'ire and po li ce
protection to Catholic schools. Busing, availabl e to
public- and private-school children a like, does not
breach the wa ll of separation.
Since 1947 the Court has applied the wa ll-ofseparation theory to strike down as unconstitutional
every effort to h ave any form of prayer in public
schools, even if it is nonsectarian, 49 volun tary, 50 or
limited to reading a passage of the Bible. 5] Since
1992 it has even been unconstitution a l for a public
school to ask a rabbi or minister to offer a prayer-an
invocation or a benediction- at the schoo l's graduation ceremony, and since 2001 it has been unconstitutional for a stud ent, elected by other students, to
lead a volunta ry prayer at the beginning of a high
school footba ll game. 52 Moreover, the Court has held
that laws prohibiting teaching the theory of evolu tion or requiring giv ing equal time to "creationism"
(the biblical doctrine that God created mankind) are
religiously inspired and thus unconstitutional. 5 3 A
public school may not a llow its pupils to take time
out from their regular classes for religious instruction if this occurs wit hin the schoo ls, though
"released-time" instruction is a ll right if it is do ne
outside the public sc hool buildin g. 54 The school
prayer decis ions in particular have provoked a storm
of controversy, but efforts to get Congress to propose
to the states a constitutional a mendment authorizing such prayers have fai led.
Almost as controversial h ave been Court-imposed
restrict ions on public aid to parochial school s,
though here the wal l-o f-separation prin ciple has not
been used to forbid any and all forms of aid. For
example, it is permissible for the federal governmen t
to provide aid for constructing buildings on denominational (as well as nondenominationa l) co llege
campuses 5S and for state governments to loan free
textbooks to parochial-schoo l pupils, 56 grant taxexempt status to parochial schools, 5 7 allow parents
of parochial-school children to deduct their tuition
payments on a state's in come tax returns, 58 a nd pay
for compu ters and a deaf child 's sign language interpreter at private and religious schools. 59 But the government cannot pay a sa lary supplement to teachers
who teac h secular subj ects in parochia l schoo ls,60
reimburse parents for the cost of parochial-school
tuition,6 ] supply parochial schoo ls with services
such as counseling,62 give money with wh ich to pur-

ch ase instructional materials , require that "creationism" be taught in public schools. or create a specia l
schoo l distri ct for Hasidic Jews. 63
The Court sometimes changes its mind on these
matters. In 1985 it said that the states cou ld not send
teachers into parochia l schools to teach remed ia l
cou rses for needy children. but twelve years later it
decided that they cou ld. "We no longer presume, "
the Court wrote, "that public employees will inculcate religion simply because they happen to be in a
sectarian environmenL"64
Perhaps the most important estab lishmen t-clause
decision in recent times was t he Co urt ruling that
vouchers can be used to pay for children being educated at religious and other private schools. The case
began in Cleveland, Ohio, where the state offered
money to any fami ly (especia lly poor ones) whose
children attended a school that had done so badly
that it was under a federa l court order req uiring it to
be managed directly by the state superintendent of
schoo ls. The money, a voucher. could be used to send
a child to any other pub lic or private sc hool, including one run by a religiOUS group. The Court held that
th is plan did not violate the establishment clause
because the a id went. not to the schoo l. but to the
fam ilies who were to choose a schoo l. 65
If' you !'ind it confUSing to foll ow the twists and
turns of Court policy in th is area. you are not a lone.
The wa ll-of-separation principle has not been easy to
apply, and the Court has begun to a lter its position on
church-state matters. (Justices O'Connor, Rehnquist,
Sca li a . Kennedy, and Thoma s have generally supported lowering-or perhaps perforating- the wall a
bit. ) The Court h as tried to sort out the confusion by
developing a three-part test to decide under what circumstances government involvement in religious
activ ities is improper. 66 That invo lvement is co nstitutiona l if it meets these tests:
1. It has a secu lar purpose.
2. Its primary effect neither advan ces nor inhibi ts
religion.
3. It does not foster a n excessive governm ent enta nglement with reli gion.

No sooner bad the test been developed than the
Co urt decided that it was a ll right for the government
of Pawtucket, Rhode Island, to erect a Nativity scene
as part of a Christmas disp lay in a local parle But five
years later it sa id that P ittsburgh could not put a
Nativity scene in front of the courthouse but could

Crime al1d Due Process

How Would You Decide?
Suppose that you are on the Supreme Court. In each
of the actua l cases summarized below, you are asked
to decide whether the First Amendment to the Constitution permits or prohibits a particular action,
What would be your decision ? (How the Supreme
Court actua lly decided is given on page 117.)
Case 1: Jacksonville, Florida, passed a city ord inance prohibiting drive-in movies from showing
films containing nudity if the screen was visible to
passersby on the street. A movie theater manager
protested , claiming that he had a Fi rst Amendment right to show such film s, even if they could
be seen from the street. Who is correct?
Case 2: Dr. Benjamin Spack wanted to enter
Fort Dix Military Reservation in ew Jersey to pass
out ca mpaign li terature a nd di scuss iss ues w ith
service personnel. The military denied him access
on grounds that regul ations prohibit partisan
campaigning on military bases. Who is correct?
Case 3: A town passed an ordina nce forbidding
the placin g of "For Sa le" or "Sold " signs in front of
homes in racially changing neighborhoods. The
purpose was to reduce "white ni ght" and pani c selling. A realty firm protested, claiming that its freedom of speech was being abridged. Who is correct?

display a menorah (a Jewis h symbol of Cha nukah )
next to a Christmas tree a nd a sign extolling liberty.
The Co urt claimed that the crec he had to go
(beca use, bei ng too close to the courth ouse, a government endorsement wa s implied) but the menorah
could stay (because, being next to a Christmas tree, it
would not lead peopl e to think that Pittsburgh was
end orsing Jud aism).67
Confu sed? It gets worse. Though the Co ur t has
struck down prayer in publi c school s, it has uph eld
prayer in Congress (since 1789, the House a nd Senate open each session with a prayer).nR A public
school cannot have a chaplain, but th e a rm ed services ca n . The Court has said that the government
cannot "advan ce" religion, but it ha s not objected
to the printing of the phrase "In God We Trust" on
the ba ck of every dollar bill.
It is obvious that despite its efforts to set forth clear
rules govern ing church-state relations, the Court's

Case 4: A girl in Georgia was raped and died. A
local television station broadcast the name of the
girl, having obtained it from court records. Her
fath er sued, claiming that his family's right to privacy had been violated , and pOinted to a Georgia
law th at made it a crime to broadcast the name of
a rape victim. The telev ision station claimed that it
had a ri ght und er the First Amendment to broadcast the name. Who is correct?
Case 5: Florida passed a law giving a political
ca ndid ate the right to equal space in a newspaper
that had publish ed attacks on him. A newspaper
claimed that this violated the freedom of the press
to publish what it wants. Who is correct?
Case 6: Zacchini is a "human ca nnonball "
whose entire fifteen -second act was filmed and
broadcast by an Ohio television station. Zacchini
sued the station, cl aiming that his earning power
had been reduced by the film because the station
showed for free what he charges people to see at
county fa irs. The station replied th at it had a First
Amendment right to broadcast such events. Who
is correct?

actua l decisions a re hard to summ arize. It is deeply
div ided- some would say deeply co nfused- on these
matters, and so the efforts to defin e the "wa ll of separation" will continu e to prove to be as difficult as the
Court 's earlier efforts to decid e what is interstate and
what is loca l commerce (see Chapter 3).

. . ;. Crime and Due Process
Whereas the central problem in interpreting the religion clauses of the First Amendment has been to
decide what th ey mean, the centra l problems in
interpreting those parts of the Bi ll of Rights that
affect people acc used of a crime have been to dec ide
not only what they mean but a lso how to put them
into effect. It is not obvious what constitutes a n
"unreasonable sea rch ," but even if we settle that
question, we still must decide how best to protect

113

114

Chapter 5

Civ il Liberties

LANDMARK CASES
Religious Freedom
• Engel v. Vitale (1962): There may not be a prayer, even a nondenominational one, in
public schools.
• Everson v. Board of Education (1947): The wall-of-separation principle is announced .
• Lee v. Weisman (1992): Public schools may not have clergy lead prayers at graduation
ceremonies.
• Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971): Three tests are described for deciding whether
the government is improperly involved with religion .
• Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe (2000): Students may not lead prayers before
the start of a football game at a public school.
• Zelman v. Simmons-Harris, 536 U.S. 639 (2000): Voucher plan to pay school bills is upheld .
• Zorauch v. Clauson (1952): States may allow students to be released from public schools
to attend religious instruction.

people against such searches in ways that do not
unduly hinder criminal investigations.
There are at least two ways to provide that protection. One is to let the poli ce introduce in court ev idence relevant to the gui lt or innocence of a person.
no matter how it was obtained and then, after the
case is settled. punish the police officer (or his or her
superiors) if th e evidence was gathered improperly
(for exa mple, by an unreasonabl e sea rch). The other
way is to exclude improperly gathered evidence from
the tria l in the first pl ace. even if it is releVant to
determining the guilt or innocence of the accused .
Most democratic nations , including England, use
the first method : the United States uses the second .
Beca use of this, many of the landmark cases decided
by th e Supreme Court have been bitterly controversial. Opponents of these decisions have argued that a
gui lty person should not go free just beca use the
police officer blundered, especially if the mistake was
minor. Supporters rejoin that there is no way to
punish errant police officers effectively other than
by excluding tainted ev idence; moreover, nobody

exclusionary rule

Improperly gathered evidence may not be introduced in a criminal
trial.

should be co nvicted of a crime except by ev id ence
that is above reproa ch. 69

The Exclusionary Rule
The American method relies on what is ca lled the
exclusionary rule. That rule holds that ev idence
gathered in violation of the Constitution ca nnot be
used in a trial. The rule has been used to implement
two provisions of the Bill of Rights-the right to be
free from unreaso nable searches a nd seizures (Fourth
Amendment) and the right not to be compelled to give
evidence against oneself (Fifth Amendment).*
Not until 1949 did the Supreme Court consider
whether to app ly the exclus ion ary rule to the states.
[n a case decided that year the Court made it cl ear
that th e Fourth Amendment prohibited the police
from ca rrying out unreaso nable searches and
obta ining improper confessions but held that it was

*We shall consider here only two constitutional li mitsthose bearing on searches and confessions. Thus we wi ll
om it many other important constitutional provisions affecting criminal cases, such as rul es governing wi retapping,
prisoner rights, the right to bail and to a jury trial, the bar
on ex post facto laws, the right to be represented by a
lawyer in court, the ban on "cruel and unusual " punishment, and the rule aga inst double jeopa rdy.

Congress Debates the
EXclusionary Rule
October 15
WASH INGTON

Congress takes lip tomorr
tlltlonal amendment that W Iow a proposed constirlile from trials The S Oll d ban the exclusionary

COlIrts to exc/u'de'

uprel11e Court has required

fi·
Il11properi
rOI11 cflmin al cases
Y gathered evidence

MEMORANDUM
To: Senator Edward Cortez
From: Mary Briscoe, legislative assistant
Federal courts have been required to exclude improperly gathered evidence since 1886
and state courts since 1961 . The rule is an effort to prevent unconstitutional searches
and seizures. The constitutional amendment would ban the rule and create instead a
procedure for punishing police officers who violate the Constitution .
Arguments for:
1. The rule makes it easy for defense attorneys to attack police evidence by having
the judge declare it inadmissible . As a result a guilty person may go free because
a police officer made a mistake.
2. The rule does not punish a police officer who violates the Constitution. Instead it
benefits only accused persons .
3. No other democratic country uses the exclusionary rule.
Arguments against:
1. The rule protects the privacy of every individual by discourag ing illegal searches.
2. There is no easy way to punish police officers who gather illegal evidence except by
preventing them from using it in court.
3. There is no strong evidence that guilty people go free because of the rule.
Your decision:
Favor amendment _ _ __
Oppose amendment _ __

116

Chapter 5

Civil Liberties

not necessary to use the exclusionary rule to enforce
those prohibitions. It noted that other nations did not
requ ire that evidence impro perly gathered had to be
excluded from a crimin a l trial. The Cour t sa id that
the loca l police should not improperly gather and use
evidence. but if they did . the remedy was to sue the
police department or punish the offi cer. 70
But in 1961 the Supreme Court ch anged its mind
about the use of the excl usionary ru le. It all began
when the Cleveland police broke into the home of
Dollree Mapp in search of drugs a nd . finding none.
arrested her for possessing some obscene pictures
that they found there. The Court held that this was
an unreasonable search and seizure because the
police had not obtained a search warra nt. thou gh
they had had ample time to do so. Furthermore, such
illega lly gathered evidence could not be used in the
trial of Mapp.7l Beginning with this case-Mapp v.
Ohio--the Su preme Co urt required the use of the
exclusionary rule as a way of enforcing a va riety of
constitutional guarantees.

Search and Seizure
After the Court decided to exclu de improperly gathered
evidence. the next problem was to decide what evidence was improper. Wbat happened to Dollree Mapp
was a n easy case: hardly anybody argued that it was
reasonable for the police to break into someone's home
without a warra nt. ransack their belongings. a nd take
whatever they could fmd tbat might be incriminating.
But that left a lot of hard choices still to be made.
When ca n the police search you without its being
unreasonable? Under two circumstances- when they
have a search warrant and when they have lawfully
arrested you. A search warrant is an order from a
judge authorizing the search of a place; the order
must describe what is to be searched and seized. and
the judge can issue it only if he or she is persuaded by
the police that good reason (probable cause) exists
to believe that a crime has been committed and that
the evidence bearin g on that crime will be found at a
certain location. (Tbe police can a lso search a building if the occupant gives them permission.)
search warrant

A judge's order authorizing a

search.
Reasonable cause for issuing a
search warrant or making an arrest; more than
mere suspicion .

IJrobable cause

In addition. you ca n be searched if the search
occurs when you a re being lawfully ar rested. Wh en
can you be arrested? You ca n be arrested if a judge
has issued a n arrest warra nt for you , if yo u commit
a crime in the presence of a police offi cer, or if the
offi cer has probab le ca use to believe that you have
co mmitted a serious crim e (usually a fe lony). If you
are a rrested and no search warrant has been issu ed,
the police. a nd not a judge. decide what they ca n
search. What ru les should they follow ?
In try ing to a nswer that question, the courts h ave
elaborated a set of ru les that are complex, subj ect to
frequent change. and quite controversial. In genera l
the police. after arresting you. can search:
• You
• Th in gs in plain view
• Things or places under your immedi ate control
As a practical matter. things "in pla in view" or
"under your immed iate control " mea n the room in
which yo u are arrested but not other rooms of the
house. 72 If the police want to search the rest of your
house or a car parked in your driveway. they will first
have to go to a judge to obta in a search warrant. But
if the police arrest a college student on ca mpus for
drinking under age a nd then accompany that student back to his or her dor mitory room so that the
student can get proof that he or she was old enough
to drink , the po lice can seize drugs that a re in plain
view in that room .7 3 And if marijuana is growing in
pla in view in a n open fi eld . the police can enter and
search that field even though it is fenced off with a
locked gate an d a "No Trespassing" sign . 74
But what if you are arrested while driving your
car- how much of it can the police search ? The
answer to that question has changed a lmost yearly.
In 19 79 the Court ruled that the police could not
search a suitcase taken from a car of an arrested person. and in 1981 it extended this protection to any
"closed, opaque container" found in the car.7 5 But
the foll ow ing yea r the Court decided that a ll parts of
a car. closed or open, could be searched if the officers
had probable ca use to beli eve that they contain ed
contraba nd (that is. goods illega lly possessed). And
recently the rules govern in g car sea rches have been
relaxed even further. Officers who have probabl e
ca use to sea rch a ca r can a lso search the things passe ngers a rc ca rrying in the ca r. And if the ca r is
stopped to give the dri ver a traffic ticket. the car ca n
be sea rched if the offi cer develops a "reasonable.

Crime and Due Process

How the Court Decided
The United States Supreme Court answered the
questions on page 11 3 in the following ways:
Case 1: The drive-in movie won. The Supreme
Court, 6- 3, decided that the First Amendmen t protects the right to show nudity; it is up to the unwilling viewer on the public streets to avert his or her
eyes.
Erznoznik v. Jacksonville,
422 U. S. 205 (19 75)
Case 2: The military won. The Supreme Court,
6- 2 , decided that military reservations are not like
public streets or parks, and thus civilians can be
excluded from them, especially if such exclusion
preven ts the mili tary from appearing to be the
handmaiden of vari ous political causes.
Greer v. Spock,
4 24 U.S. 828 (1976)
Case 3: The realty firm won. The Supreme
Court, 8-0 , decided that the First Amendment prohibits the banning of signs, even of a commercial
nature, without a strong, legitimate state interest.
Banning the signs would not obviously reduce
"white flight. " and the government has no right to
withhold information from citizens for fear that
they will act unwisely.
Linmark Associates, Inc. v. Willingboro,
4 3 1 US. 85 (19 77)

articul abl e suspi cion " th at the car is involved in
other illegal activity.76
In this confusing area of the law the Court is
attempting to protect those pl aces in which a person
has a "reasonable expectation of privacy." Your body is
one such place, and so the Court has held that the
police can n ot compel you to undergo surgery to
remove a bullet that might be evidence of your guilt or
innocence in a crime.?7 But the police ca n req uire you
to take a Breathalyzer test to see whether you have
been drinking while drivi ng. 78 Your home is another
place where you h ave an expectation of privacy, but a
barn next to your home is not, nor is your backyard
viewed from an airplane, nor is yo ur home if it is a
motor home that can be driven away, and so the po lice
need not h ave a warrant to look into these places.79
If you work for the government, yo u have an
expectation that your desk and files will be private;

Case 4: The television station won. The Court,
8- 1 , decided that the First Amendment protects
th e righ t to broadcast the names of rape victims
obtained from public (that is, court) records.
Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn,
420 US. 469 (19 75)
Case 5: The newspa per won. The Supreme
Co urt decided unanimously that the First Amendment prohibits the state [rom intruding into the
function of editors.
Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo,
41 8 U S. 241 (1974)
Case 6: Zacchini, the human ca nnonball, won.
The Supreme Court, 5- 4 , decided that broadcasting the entire act without the performer's consent
jeopardized his means of livelihood, even though
the First Amendment would guarantee the right of
the station to broadcast newsworthy facts about
the act.
Zacchini v. Scripps-Howard Broadcasting Co.,
4 33 U S. 562 (1977)

nonetheless, your super visor may search the desk
and files without a warrant, provided that h e or she
is looking for something related to your work.80 But
bear in mind that the Constitution protects you only
against the government; a private employer has a
great deal of freedom to search your desk and files.

Confessions and Self-Incrimination
The constitutional ban on being forced to give ev idence against oneself was originally intended to preven t th e use of torture or "third-deg ree" poli ce
tactics to extract confessions. But it has since been
extended to cover many kinds of statements uttered
not out of fear of torture but from lack of awareness
of one's righ ts, especially th e righ t to remain silent,
whether in the courtroom or in the police station.
For many decades the Supreme Court had held
that invo luntary confessions could n ot be used in

117

1] 8

Chapter 5

Civil Liberties

A police officer rends the Miranda warnin(J to a man he
!ws arrested.

fed era l crimin a l trials but had not ruled that they
were barred from state trials. But in the early 1960s
it changed its mind in two landmark cases- Escobedo
and Miranda. 81 The story of the latter and of the controversy that it provoked is worth telling.
Ernesto A. Miranda was convicted in Arizona of
the rape and kidnapping of a young woman. The
conviction was based on a written confession that
Miranda signed after two hours of police questioning. (The victim also identified him.) Two years ea rli er the Court had decided that the rul e against
self-incrimination applied to state courts .82 Now the
question arose of what constitutes an "involuntary"
confession. The Court decided that a co nfessio n
should be presumed involuntary unless the person in
custody had been fully and clea rly inform ed of his or
her right to be silent. to have an attorney present
during any questioning. and to have an attorney pro-

vided free of charge if he or she could not afford one.
The accused may waive th ese rights and offer to talk.
but the waiver must be truly voluntary. Since Miranda did not have a lawyer present when he was qu estioned and had not knowingly waived hi s right to a
lawyer. the confession was excluded from ev idence in
the trial and his conviction was overturned. S3
Miranda was tried and convicted again. this time
on the basis of evidence supplied by his girlfriend.
who testified that he had admitted to her that he was
guilty. Nine years later he was rel eased from prison :
four years after that he was killed in a barroom fight.
When the Phoenix police arrested the prime suspect
in Ernesto Miranda's murder. they read him his
rights from a "Miranda ca rd ."
Everyone who watches cops-and-robbers shows
on television probably knows the "Miranda warning" by heart (see the box on page 119). The police
now read it routinely to people whom they arrest. It
is not clear whether it ha s much impact on who does
or does not confess or what effect. if any. it may have
on the crime rate.
In time the Miranda rule was extended to mean
that you have a right to a lawyer when you appear in
a police Ii neup 84 and when you are questioned by a
psychiatrist to determine whether you are competent
to stand trial. R5 The Court threw out the conviction
of a man who had killed a child. beca u se the
accused, without being given the right to have a
lawyer present, had led the police to the victim's
body.Sf) You do not have a right to a Miranda warning. however. if while in jail you con fess a crime to
another inmate who turn s out to be an undercover
police officer. 87
Some police departments have tried to get around
the need for a Miranda warning by training their officers to question suspects before giving them a Miranda warning and then. if th e suspect confessed. giving
the warning and asking the sa me questions over
again. But the Supreme Court would not allow this
and struck th e practice down. 88

Relaxing the Exclusionary Rule
Cases such as Miranda were highly controversial and
led to efforts in Congress to modify or overrule th e
dec isions by statute-without mu ch coming of th e
attempts. But as the rules governing poli ce conduct
became increasingly more complex. pressure mounted to find an alternative. Some thought that any
evidence should be admissible. with th e qu estion of

Crime and Due Process

HOW THINGS WORK
The Miranda Rule
The Supreme Court has interpreted the due-process clause to require that local police
departments issue warnings of the sort shown below to people whom they are arresting .

PHILADELPHIA POLICE DEPARTMENT

C.

You have a right to talk to a
lawyer of your own choice
befor e we ask you any questio ns ,
and also to have a lawyer here
with you while we ask questions.

D.

If vou cannot afford to hire a
lawYer, and you want one, we
will see that you have one
provided to you free of cha rge
before we a sk you any questi ons.

E.

If you are willing to give us a
statement, you have a right to
stop any time you wish.

STANDARD POL ICE INTERROGATION CARD
WARNINGS TO BE GIVEN ACCUSED
We are questioning y o u concerning the
crime of (state sp e cific crime).
We have a duty to explain to
you and to warn you that you
have the following lega l rights:
A.

B.

You have a right to remain
silent and do not have to say
anything at all.
Anything you say can and will
be used against you in Court .

75-Misc.-3

(Over)

(6-24-70)

Ernesto A. Miranda was convicted in Arizona oj rape and kidnapping. When the Supreme Court overturned the conviction.
it iss lied a set oj rules- the "Miranda rules"-goveming how police must conduct an arrest and interrogation.

police conduct left to lawsu its or other ways of punishing official misbehav ior. Others felt that the exclusionary rule served a useful purpose but had simply
become too technica l to be an effective deterrent to
police misconduct (the police ca nn ot obey rules that
they ca nnot understand). And still others felt that
the exclu sionary rul e was a vita l sa feguard to essentialliberties a nd should be kept inta ct. The Court has
refused to let Congress abo lish Miranda because it is
a constitutiona l rule. 89
The courts themselves began to adopt the second
position. deciding a number of cases in ways that
retained the exclusionary rule but modified it by lim iting its coverage (police were given greater freedom
to question juveniles)90 and by incorporating what
was ca ll ed a good-faith exception. For exam pl e. if
the police obtain a search warrant that they beli eve
is va lid . the evidence that they gather will not be
excluded if it later turns out that the warrant was
defective for some reason (such as the judge's hav in g
used the wrong form).91 And the Court decided that

"overriding considerations of public sa fety" may justify questioning a person without first reading the
person his or her rights. 92 Mo reover, the Court
changed its mind about the ki ller who led the police
to the place where he had di sposed of his victim's
body. After the man was convicted a second time and
again appea led , the Court in 1984 held that the body
would have been discovered a nyway: thus evidence
will not be excluded if it can be shown that it would
"i nevitab ly" have been found. 9 3

Terrorism and Civil Liberties
The attacks of September 11, 2001. raised importa nt questions about how far the government ca n go
in investigating and prosecuting individ ua ls.

good-faith exception An error in gathering
evidence sufficiently minor that it may be used
in a trial.

]]9

120

Chapter 5

Civil LiiJerties
Crime. This provisio n elimin a tes the statu te of
limitation on terrorist crimes a nd in creases the
pen a lt ies.

Although Osmna bin Laden, pictllred here ill a video-taped address,
remains at lo rge, many oj Iris 01 Queda network have been captured.

A li ttle over one mo nth after the a ttacks, Con gress
passed a new law, th e USA Pa tri ot Act, des igned to
increase federal powers to investiga te terrorists.* Its
main provisions are these:
• Telepho ne taps. The government may ta p. if it
h as a court order, a ny te lephone a suspect uses
instead of having to get a sepa ra te o rd er for each
telephone.
• Internet taps. The governmen t may tap, if it has a
cour t order, Intern et communicatio ns.
• Voice ma il. The governmen t, w it h a cour t ord er,
may seize voice m a il.
• Gra nd jury information . Investigators ca n now
s h a re w ith oth er governmen t offi cials things
learned in secret g ra nd jury hearin gs.
• Immigra tio n. The a ttorney ge neral may hold any
noncitizen who is thought to be a national security risk for up to seven days. If the alien cannot
be ch arged with a crime or deported w ithin that
time, he or she m ay still be deta ined if he or she is
cer tified to be a security risk.
• Mon ey la und erin g. The governm e nt gets new
powers to track t he movemen t of money across
U.S. borders and am o ng ba nks.

*The name of the law is an acronym derived from the official t itle of th e bi ll , drawn f rom the f irst letters of the fol lowing capitalized words: Uniti ng and Strengthening
Ame rica by Provid ing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT).

About a month later, Presiden t Bush , by executive order, procla imed a n ationa l emergen cy under
w hi ch a ny noncitizen who is be lieved to be a terrorist or has harbored a terrorist w ill be tried by a milita ry, ra th er than a civili a n . court.
A milita ry trial is carried on before a commission
of milita ry officers a nd n ot a civilian jury. Th e tribuna l ca n operate in secret if cl assified information is
used in ev id ence. Two-third s of the commission must
ag ree before the suspect ca n be co nvicted and sente nced . If co nvicted, the suspect can a ppeal to the
secreta ry of defen se and the president, but not to a
civilia n court.
These commiss io ns may eve ntua lly be used to try
some of the men captured by the U.S. military during its ca mpaign in Afgha nista n aga inst the Taliban
regime a nd the al Qaeda terro rist network tha t was
created by Osama bin Laden . These deta in ees were
held in a prison at our Gua nta na mo nava l base in
Cuba a nd a re not rega rded by the Defense Depar tmen t as o rdinary prisoner s of wa r.
The biggest legal issue crea ted by th is co untry's
wa r o n terrorism is whether the people we capture
can be held by our government with out givin g them
access to the courts. Th e tradi tio n a l view. first
a nn o un ced during World War II. was that spies
sent to this country by the Nazis could be tried by a
mi lita ry tribun a l instea d of by a civilia n cou r t. They
were neith er citizens nor soldiers, but "unlawful
co mba ta n ts."94 The Bush administration relied on
thi s view w hen it detained in o ur militar y base in
Gua nta na mo Bay, Cuba, men seized by American
forces in Afg ha n istan. These men were mostly members of the a l Qaeda ter rorist movement or of the Taliba n movemen t that govern ed Afgha nistan before
Am erica n a rmed fo rces, togethe r wi t h Afgh a n
rebels. defeated them , These me n , no ne of them
American citizens, a rgued t ha t they were neither
terro rists nor combata n ts. They dem a nded access to
America n cour ts . By a vote of six to three, the
Supreme Court h eld that Ameri ca n co urts ca n consid er challen ges to the legality of the dete ntio n of
th ese men. The Court's opinio n did not spell out what
the co urts should do when it hears these petitions. 95
I.n a nother decision given the sam e day, th e Supreme
Court ruled on the case of a n America n citizen who

Summary

LANDMARK CASES
Criminal Charges
• Dickerson v. United States (2000): The Mapp decision is based on the Constitution and it
cannot be altered by Congress passing a law.
• Gideon v. Wainwright (1964): Persons charged with a crime have a right to an attorney
even if they cannot afford one .
• Mapp v. Ohio (1961): Evidence illegally gathered by the police may not be used in a
criminal trial.
• Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966): Court describes ruling that police must give to
arrested persons.
• Rasul v. Bush, 03-334 (2004): Terrorist detainees must have access to a neutral court to
decide if they are legally held.

• United States v. Leon (1984): Illegally obtained evidence may be used in a trial if it was
gathered in good faith without violating the principles of the Mapp decision .

apparently was working with the Taliban regime but
was captured by our forces and was imprisoned in
South Carolina. The Court said that American citizens
were entitled to a hearing before a neutral decision
maker in order to challenge the basis for detention. 96
No one knows what kind of courts will hear the
petitions by the foreign detainees or what rules they
wi ll apply. In theory this decision may make capturin g enemy prisoners a complex and time-consuming
lega l problem, but so far we ca n on ly guess as to how
it will work out in practice.
In addition to the USA Patriot Act and the presidential order about mil itary tribunals. key federal
agencies have intensifi ed their investigations. The

*
C

Justice Department has detained many immigrants.
authorized federal investigators to listen in on conversations between some federa l prisoners an d their
lawyers, promised to help in obtaining citizenship for
immigrants who help the nation identify terrorists.
and (with the State Department) intensified scrutiny
of app lications for visas filed by people from certa in
countries.
Many of these measures have been criti cized by
civil liberties organizations and may be cha llenged in
court. To meet some of these arguments. Congress
prOVided that certain provisions of the Patriot Act,
such as seizi ng voice ma il in pursuance of a court
order. would automatica lly expire in 2005.

SUMMARY

ivilliberties questions are in some ways like and
in some ways unlike ordinary policy debates.
Like most issues. civil liberties problems often invo lve
competing interests-in this case con fli cting rights or
conflicting rights and duties- and so we have groups
mobilized on both sides of issues involving free speech
and crime control. Like some other issues, civilliberties problems can a lso arise from the successful

appeals of a policy entrepreneur, and so we have period ic reductions in liberty resulting from popu la r
fears, usua lly aroused during or just after a war.
But civil liberties are unlike many other issues in
at least one regard: more than struggles over welfare spending or defense or economic po licy. debates
about civil liberties reach down into our fundamental political beliefs and political cu lture. cha ll eng in g

121

122

Chapter 5

Civil Liberties

us to define what we mea n by religion, Americanism,
and decency,
The most importa nt of these cha llenges focuses
on the meaning of the First Amendment: What is
"speech "? How much of it should be free? How fa r
can the state go in aiding religion ? How do we strike
a ba la nce between nationa l security a nd persona l
expression ? The zigzag course followed by the co urts
in judging these m atters has, on balance, tend ed to
enlarge freedom of expression,
Almost as important has been the struggle to
strike a ba la nce between the right of society to protect itself from crimi na ls and the ri ght of peo ple
(includin g crimina ls) to be free from unreasonabl e
searches a nd coe rced confess ions. As with free
speech cases, the co urts have genera lly broadened
the ri ghts at some expense to the power of the police.
But in recent years the Supreme Court has pull ed
back from so me of its more sweeping a pplications of
the exclusionary rule.
The resolution of these issues by th e co urts is
politica l in the sense that differing opinions about
wh at is right or desirable compete, with one side or
another prevailing (often by a sma ll majority). In this
competiti on of ideas federa l judges. though not elected. are often sensitive to stron g currents of popul a r
opinion. When entrepreneuria l politi cs has produced
new action against apparently threa tenin g minoriti es. judges are inclined, at least for a whil e. to give
seriou s co nsideration to popular fea rs a nd legislative
majorities. And when no strong nationa l mood is
discernibl e. the opini ons of elites influence judicia l
thinkin g (as described in Ch apter 1 6) .

At the same time. courts resolve politica l conflicts
in a manner that differs in important respects from the
resolu tion of conflicts by legislatures or executives.
First. the very existence of the courts. and the relative
ease with which one may enter them to advance a
claim. facilitates challenges to accepted va lues. An
unpopular political or religious group may have little
or no access to a legislature, but it will have substantial
access to the courts. Second. judges often settle controversies about rights not simply by deciding the case
at hand but by formulating a general rule to cover 1U<e
cases elsewh ere. This has a n advantage (the law tends
to become more consistent and better known ) but a
disadvantage as well: a rule suitable for one case may
be unworkabl e in another. Judges reason by analogy
and sometimes assume that two cases are similar
when in fact there are importa nt differences. A definition of "obscenity" or of "fig htin g words" may suit one
situation but be in adeq uate in a nother. Third. judges
interpret the Constitution. whereas legislatures often
consul t popul ar preferences or person a l convictions.
However much their own beliefs influ ence what judges
read into the Constitution. almost all of them are constra ined by its language.
Taken together. the desire to find a nd a nnounce
rules. the la nguage of the Constitution. a nd th e personal beli efs of judges have led to a genera l expansion of civil liberties. As a result, even a llowing for
tempora ry reversals and frequent redefinitions, a ny
va lu e th at is thought to hind er freedom of expression
a nd the ri ghts of the accused has generally lost
ground to the cla ims of the First, Fourth. Fifth . and
Sixth Amendments.

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?
1. Why do the COllrts play so large a role in decid-

ing w/llIt our civillilJerlies should be?

The courts are independent of the executive a nd legislative bra nches. both of which will respond to public press ures. In wa rtim e or in other cri sis periods.
people want "somethin g done." Th e presid ent and

members of Co ngress kn ow this. The co urts are usually a bra ke on their dema nd s. But of co urse the
courts can ma ke mistakes or get thin gs confused. as
many peopl e believe they have with th e establishment clause a nd the ri ghts of crimin a l defend a nts.

Summary
RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. Why not display religious symbols

011 government property?
The courts believe tha t putting on governm en t property a single religi ous sy mbol. such as a ativity
scene, w ill ma ke Americans believe tha t the governmen t endorses that religion. But if sy mbols fro m severa l diffe rent religions are displayed, no one thinks
th e government h as endorsed a nyone of them . Of
course, putting "In God We Trust" on a government
doll a r bill is a ll ri ght. Do n ot look ror consistency here.

~r

a person confesses to committil1g II crime, wl1y
is tl1at confession sometimes not used in court?
Beca use th e co nfess ion was improperly gathered by
th e poli ce. Suspects may not be tortured, and they

2.

must be given the Miranda warning. There a re other
ways of protecting the right of peopl e to be free of
impro per police procedures, suc h as admittin g the
confession in court and then puni shing the ofri cers
wh o gathered it improperly. The American co urts do
not think that system would work in this country.

3 . Does the Patriot Act reduce ou r liberties?
There have not yet been any court tests of the law.
Passed aller 9 / 1 1. it improves the ability of the police
to obtain search warra nts a nd eliminates the old tension between intelligence a nd law enforcement.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

Court cases: www.law.comell.edu
Civil Ri ghts Division of t he Depa rtme nt of Justice:
www.usdoj.gov
Am erica n Civil Liberties Union: www.acIu.org

SUGGESTED READINGS
Abra ha m . He nry J.. and Barba ra A. Perry. FreedGlII alld til e COllrt.
7th ed. New York: Ox ford niversity Press. 1998. Analysis of
lea din g Supreme Court cases on civil liberti es a nd civil r ights.
Am' ll". Akhil I~eed . Til e COIIStitUtiOll alld Crill/illal Procedllre: Firs/:
Prillciples. New Haven . Conn .: Vale Un iversity Press. 199 7. A
brilli a nt critiq ue of how th e Suprem e Co u rt h as in terpreted
th ose pa rts of t he Constitution beari n g on search warran ts,
the excl usionary r u le. a nd sel f~ in cr im i n a ti o n .
Be rn s. Wa lter. Tile First Allielldillellt alld tile Flltll re of AlI1ericall
Del/lDcm,.!! . New York: Basic Books. 1976 . A loo k at wh at th e

Fo unders in tend ed by th e First Amendment th a t takes issue
w ith con tempora ry Su preme Court in terpretatio ns of it.
Clor. Ha r ry M. Obscelli ty alld Public Morality. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. 19()9 . Argues for the legitim acy of lega l restricti o ns on obscenity.
Levy. Leon a rd W. Legac!} of SlIppressioll: Freedol11 of Speech alld Press
ill Ea rl!! Allierimll Histor!l. Rev. cd. New York: Oxford Un iversi ty Press. 1985. Ca re ful study of wh a t the Fou nd ers a nd the
ea rly lea ders mean t by freedom of speech a nd press.

123

CHAPTER

6

Civil Rights

The Black Predicament
The Campaign in the Courts
"Separate but Equal" • Can Separate
Schools Be Equal? • Brown v. Board
of Education

The Campaign in Congress
Racial Profiling

Women and Equal Rights
Sexual Harassment •

Privacy and Sex

Affirmative Action
Equality of Results •
Opportunity

Equality of

Gays and the Constitution

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

2.

Since Congress enacts our laws, why
has it not made certain that all
groups have the same rights?
After the Supreme Court ended racial
segregation in the schools, what did
the president and Congress do?

2.

If the law supports equality of
opportunity, why has affirmative
action become so important?
Under what circumstances can men
and women be treated differently?

n 1830 Congress passed a law requiring all Indians east of the Missis/ Sippi River to move to the Indian Territory west of the river, and the army
set about implementing it. In the 1850s a major political fight broke out in
Boston over whether the police department should be ob li ged to hire an
Irish officer. Until 1920 women cou ld not vote in most elections. In the
1930s the Cornell Un iversity Medical School had a strict quota limitin g
the number of Jewish students who could enroll. In the 1940s the army, at
the direction of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, removed all Japanese
Americans from their homes in California and placed them in relocation
centers far from the coast.
In all such cases some group, usually defined along racial or ethnic lines,
was denied access to facilities, opportunities, or services that were available
to other groups. Such cases raise the issue of civil r igh ts. The pertinent
question regarding civil rights is not whether the government has the
authority to treat different people differently; it is whether such differences
in treatment are reasonable. All laws and policies make distinctions among
people- for example, the tax laws require higher-income peop le to pay
taxes at a higher rate than lower-income ones-but not all such distinctions
are defensible. The courts have long held that classifying people on the basis
of their income and taxing them at different rates is quite permissible
because such classifications are not arbitrary or unreasonable and are
related to a legitimate pub lic need (that is, raising revenue). Increasingly,
however, the courts have said that classifying people on the basis of their
race or ethnicity is unreasonable. These are su spect classifications. and
wh il e not every law making such classifications has been ruled unconstitutiona l, they have all become subject to especially strict scrutiny,l
To explain the victimization of certain groups and the methods by which
they have begun to overcome it, we sha ll cons ider chiefly the case of African
Americans. Black-white relations have in large measure defined the problem of civil rights in this country; most of the landmark laws and court
decisions have invo lved black claims. The strategies employed by or on
behalf of African Americans have typically set the pattern for the strategies
employed by other groups. At the end of this chapter we sha ll look at the
related but somewhat different issues of women's rights and gay rights.

125

126

Chapter 6

Civil Rights

A segregated bus station in Dllrhalll . North Carolina. in 1940.

*

The Black Predicament

Thou gh co nstitutin g more than 12 percent of the
popu lation. Afri ca n Americans until fairly recently
cou ld not in ma ny parts of the co un try vote. attend
in tegrated schools. ride in the front seats of buses. or
bu y h omes in white neighborh oods.

The rights of peopl e to be treated
without un reasonabl e or unconstitutional
differences.
suspect classifications Classifications of people on the basis of t heir race or ethnicity.
s trict scrutiny A Supre me Court t est t o see if
a law denies equa l protection beca use it does
not serve a compe lli ng state inte rest and is not
narrowly ta ilo red to achieve t hat goal.
civil rights

Alth ough today whi te citizens genera lly do not
feel threatened when a black family moves into
Cicero. Illin ois. a bl ack child goes to sc hool at Little
Rock Centra l High School. or a black group orga nizes voters in Neshoba County. Mississippi . at one tim e
most whites in Cicero. Little Rock, a nd Nes hoba
Co un ty felt deeply threatened by these thin gs (a nd
some whites still do). This was especially the case in
th ose pa rts of the country. notably the Deep South.
where bl acks were often in the majority. There th e
politica lly domin a nt white minority felt keenly th e
potentia l competition for jobs. la nd . public services.
a nd livin g space posed by large numbers of people of
a nother race. But even in the North. black ga ins
often appeared to be at the expense of lower-income
whi tes who lived or worked nea r them. not at the
expense of upper-sta tu s whites who li ved in suburbs.
Africa n America ns were not a ll owed to vote at all
in ma ny areas: they cou ld vote only with great difficulty in others: and even in those places where votin g was easy. they often lacked the materi a l and
in sti tution al suppor t for effective political organization. If your opponent feels deeply threatened by
your dema nd s a nd in addition ca n deny you access to
the poli tical system that will decide the fate of th ose
dema nds. you are. to put it m il dly. at a disadva ntage.
Yet from the end of Reconstructi on to the 19 60sfor nea rly a century- ma ny bl acks in the South
found themselves in just such a position.
To the dismay of those who prefer to expla in political action in terms of economic motives. people often
attach greater importance to the intangible costs and
benefits of policies than to th e ta ngibl e ones. Thu s.
even though the average bl ack represented no threat
to the average white. antib lack atti tudes- racismproduced some appa lling actions. Between 1882 and
1946. 4.7 1 5 people. about three-fourths of them
Africa n America ns. were lynched in the United
States. 2 Some lynchin gs were car ried ou t by small
groups of vigilantes acting with mu ch ceremony. but
oth ers were the actions of frenzied mobs. In the summer of 19 11 a black man charged with murdering a
white man in Livermore. Kentucky. was dragged by a
mob to the local theater. where he was ha nged. The
audience. which had been charged admission . was
in vited to shoot the swayin g body (those in th e
orchestra seats could empty their revolvers: those in
the ba lcony were limited to a sin gle shot). 3
Though the public in other pa rts of th e country
was shocked by such events. li ttle was done: lynching

The Cwnpaign in the Courts
was a local, not a federal. crime. It obviously would
not require many lynchings to conv in ce African
Americans in these loca lities that it wou ld be fo olhardy to try to vote or enroll in a white school. And
even in those states where blacks did vote. popular
attitudes were not conducive to blacks' buyin g
homes or taking jobs on an equal basis with whites.
Even among those professing to support equal rights.
a substantial portion opposed African Americans'
efforts to obta in them and federal action to secure
them. In 1942 a national poll showed that only 30
percent of whites thought that black and white children should attend the same schools; in 1956 the
proportion had risen. but only to 49 percent. still less
than a maj ority. (In the South white support for
school integration was even lower-14 percent
favored it in 1956 , about 31 percent in 1963.) As
late as 195 6 a majority of so uthern whites were
opposed to integrated public transportation facilities.
Even among whites who generally favored integration. there was in 1963 (before the ghetto riots)
considerable opposition to the black civil rights
movement; nearly half of the whites who were classified in a survey as moderate integration ists thought
that demonstrations hurt the bl ack ca use; nearly
two-thirds disapproved of actions taken by the civil
rights movement; and over a third felt that civil
rights should be left to the states. 4
in short, the political position in which African
Americans found themselves until the 19 60s made it
dit'llcult for them to advance their interests through a
feasible legislative strategy; their opponents were
aroused. organized. and powerful. Thus if black interests were to be championed in Congress or state
legislatures. blacks would have to have white allies.
Though some such allies could be found , they were too
few to make a difference in a political system that gives
a substantial advantage to strongly motivated opponents of any new policy. For that to change. one or
both of two things would have to happen: additional
allies would have to be recruited (a delicate problem,
given that many white integrationists disapproved of
aspects of the civil rights movement). or the struggle
would have to be shifted to a policy-making arena in
which the opposition enjoyed less of an adva ntage.
Partly by plan. partly by accident. black leaders
followed both of these strategies simultaneously. By
publicizing their grievances and organizing a civil
rights movement that (at least in its early stages)

concentrated on dramatizing the denial to blacks of
essential and widely accepted liber ties, Afri ca n
Americans were able to broaden their base of support both among political elites and among the general public and thereby to raise civil rights matters
from a low to a high position on the political agenda.
By waging a patient, pro lo nged. but carefully
planned legal struggle. black leaders shifted decisionmaking power on key civil rights issues from Congress, where they had been stymied for generations,
to the federal courts.
After this strategy had achieved some substantial
successes- after blacks had become enfranchised
and lega l barriers to eq ual participation in political
and economic affairs had been lowered- the politics
of civil rights became more conventional. African
Americans were able to assert their demands directly
in the legislative a nd executive branches of government with reasonable (though scarcely certain)
prospects of success. Civil rights became less a matter
of gaining entry into the political system and more
one of waging interest gro up politics within that system . At the same time. the goals of civil rights politics
were broadened. The struggle to gain entry into the
system had focused on the denial of fund amental
rights (to vote, to organize. to obtain equal access to
schools and public facilities): later the domina nt
iss ues were manpower development. economic
progress. and the improvement of housing and
neighborhoods.

"* The Campaign in the Courts
The Fourteenth Amendment was both an opportunity and a problem for black activists. Adopted in
18 68 . it seemed to guara ntee equal rights for all: "No
state shall make or en force any law which shall
abridge the privil eges or immunities of citizens of the
United States: nor shall any state deprive any person
of life, liberty, or property, without due process of
law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction
the eq ual protection of the laws."
The key phrase was "equal protection of the
laws. " Read broadly. it might mean that the Constitution should be regarded as color-b lind : no state law
could have the effect of treating whites and blacks
differently. Thus a law segregating blacks and whites

127

128

Chapter 6

Civil Rights

into separate schools or neighborhoods would be
unconstitutional. Read narrowly, "equal protection"
might mean only that blacks and whites had certain
fundamental legal rights in common. among them
the right to sign contracts, to serve on juries. or to
buy and sell property, but otherw ise they could be
treated differently.
Historians have long debated which view Congress held when it proposed the Fourteenth Amendment. What forms or racia l segregation, ir any, were
still permissible? Seg regated trains ? Hotels? Schoo ls?
Neighborhoods?
The Supreme Court took the narrow view.
Though in 1880 it declared unconstitutional a West
Virginia law requiring juries to be composed only or
white males, s it decided in 1883 that it was unconstitutiona l ror Congress to prohibit racial discrimination in public accommodations such as hotels. 6 The
dirrerence between the two cases seemed, in the eyes
or the Court, to be this: serving on a jury was an
essentia l right of citizenship that the state co uld not
deny to any person on racial grounds without vio lating the Fo urteenth Amendment, but registering at a
hotel was a convenience controlled by a private person (the hotel owner), who co uld treat blacks and
whites differently if he or she wished.
The major decision that was to determine the
legal status of the Fourteenth Amendment ror over
half a century was P/essy v. Ferguson. Louisiana had
passed a law requirin g blacks and whites to occupy
separate cars on railroad trains operating in that
state. When Ado lph Plessy, who was seven-eighths
white and one-eighth black, rdused to obey the law.
he was arrested. He appea led his conviction to the
Supreme Court. claiming that the law violated the
Fourteenth Amendment. In 1896 the Court rejected
his claim, holding that the law treated both races
equa lly even though it required them to be separate.
The equal-protectio n clause guaranteed political and
lega l but not socia l equality. "Separate-but-equa l"
facilities were constitutional because ir "one race be
inferior to the other socially, the Constitution or the
United States cannot put them on the same plane."7

separate-but-equal doctrine The doctrine
established in Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) that
African Americans could constitutionally be
kept in separate but equal facilities.

THE CRISIS
A

R ECO RD OF THE DARKER RACES
NOVEMBER . 1910

V OIUDl" Ono:

Edne d bl' W . E. HU H(;IIAHDT Il lJ II O IS , w;lh th., c ... ·(>l'>eo',,' io .. o f O . .... ld ( ;.,,.i. ,,n Vill •• d ,

J. M . .. " •• h,., . Ch.rI", Ed ..... rd

R u~". II .

Kelly Mill" " W . S . B,. il h .... ;'" end M . O . ," led ..... ,

CO:-JTENTS
Al()ne the Color Line
Opinion

3

.

Editorial

10

The N. A. A. C. P.

12

Athena and
ville

Brownl~

13

B, M(X)MfIELO :STOREY

PU HLlSHEn

MQNTf-I LY

The Burden _

14

What to Read

IS

8Y

T il E

N ational A SSOc lation for th~ Advancement of Colored People
AT

T" I.:.:-IT'V

O!'lo'E

''''~S EY

DO I.LAR

A

NP. W

ST H EET

VE,\R

TE:-.I

HHtK

C ITY

C F.r-:TS A CO py

The cover of the first issue of The Crisis. the /IIaga zine
started by the NAACP in ] 9 10 to mise Ajdcr/ll AlI1ericnn
consciousness and puhlicize racist acts.

USeparate but Equal"
Thus bega n the separate-but-equal doctrine.
Three years later the Court applied it to schools as
well, declaring in Cumll1 ing v. Richmond Co unty Board
of Educatioll that a decision in a Georg ia community
to close the black high school while keeping open the
white hi gh school was not a violation or the Fo urteenth Amendment beca use blacks cou ld always go
to private schoo ls. Here the Court seemed to be sayin g that not only could schools be separate, they
could even be unequal. 8
What the Court has made. the Court can unmake.
But to get it to change its mind requires a long,
costly. and uncertain legal battle. The ational Association ['o r the Advancement or Co lored Peop le
(NAACP) was the ma in organ ization that waged that
battle. Formed in 1909 by a group or whites and
blacks in the artermath or a race riot. the AACP did

The Campaign in the Courts

many things- lobbying in Washington and publicizing black grievances, especially in the pages of The
Crisis, a magazine edited by W.E.B. Du Bois- but its
most influential role was played in the courtroom.
It was a rational strategy. Fighting legal battles
does not require forming broad political alliances or
changing public opinion, tasks that would have been
very difficult for a small and unpopular organization.
A court-based approach also enabled the organization to remain nonpartisan.
But it was a slow and difficult strategy. The Court
had adopted a narrow interpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment. To get the Court to change its
mind wou ld require the AACP to bring before it
cases involving the strongest possible claims that a
black had been unfairly treated- and under circumstances suffi Ciently different from those of earlier
cases that the Court cou ld find some grounds for
changing its mind.
The steps in that strategy were these: First. persuade the Court to declare unconstitutional laws
creating schools that were separate but obviously
unequal. Second, persuade it to declare unconstitutional laws supporting schools that were separate
but unequal in not-so-obvious ways. Third. persuade
it to rule that racially separate schools were inherently unequal and hence unconstitutional.

Can Separate Schools Be Equal?
The first step was accomplished in a series of court
cases stretching from 1938 to 1948. In 1938 the
Court held that Lloyd Ga in es had to be admitted to an
all-white law school in Missouri because no black
law school of eq ual quality existed in that state. 9 In
1948 the Court ordered the a U-white Un iversity of
Oklahoma Law School to admit Ada Lois Sipuel, a
bl ack, even though the state planned to build a black
law school later. For education to be equal, it had to
be equally available. lO It still could be separate, however: the university admitted Ms. Sipuel but required
her to attend classes in a section of the state capitol.
roped off from other students, where she could meet
with her law professors.
The second step was taken in two cases decided in
1950. Heman Sweatt, an African American. was
treated by the University of Texas Law School much
as Ada Sipuel had been treated in Oklahoma: "admitted" to the all-white school but relegated to a separate building. Another African American, George
McLaurin, was allowed to study for his Ph.D. in a

"colored section" of the all-white University of Oklahoma. The Supreme Court unanimously decided
that these arrangements were unconstitutional
because, by imposing racially based barriers on the
black students' access to professors, libraries, and
other students, they created unequal educational
opportunities. 1 1
The third step, the climax of the entire drama,
began in Topeka. Kansas, where Linda Brown wanted to enroll in her neighborhood school but could not
because she was black and the school was by law
reserved exclUSively for whites. When the NAACP
took her case to the federal district court in Kansas,
the judge decided that the black school that Linda
could attend was substantia lly equa l in quality to the
white schoo l that she could not attend. Therefore
denying her access to the white school was constitutional. To change that the lawyers would have to
persuade the Supreme Court to overrule the district
judge on the grounds that racially separate schools
were unconstitutional even if they were equal. In
other words. the separate-but-equal doctrine would
have to be overturned by the Court.
It was a risky and controversial step to take. Many
states, Kansas among them. were trying to make their
all-black schools equal to those of whites by launching expensive building programs. If the NAACP
succeeded in getting separate schools declared
unconstitutional. the Court might well put a stop to
the building of these new schoo ls. Blacks could win a
moral and legal victory but suITer a practical defeatthe loss of these new facilities. Despite these risks, the
NAACP decided to go ahead with the appeal.

Brown v. Board of Education
On May 17. 1954. a unanimous Supreme Court,
speaking through an opinion written and delivered by
Chief Justice Earl Warren. found that "in the field of
public education the doctrine of 'separate but equal'
has no place" because "separate educational facilities are inherently unequal."l2 Plessy v. Ferguson was
overruled. and "separate but equal" was dead .
The ruling was a landmark decision, but the reasons for it and the means chosen to implement it were
as important and as controversial as the decision itself.
There were at least three issues. First. how would the
decision be implemented? Second, on what grounds
were racially separate schools unconstitutional?
Third. what test would a school system have to meet in
order to be in conformity with the Constitution?

129

Court to Rule on Black
Colleges
Jan uary 19
WASHTNGTON
The Supreme COllrt ha
decIde whether all-black C~lJanl1ounced that it will
receIve state SUpport if th . eges In the South can
attending them. The c ele are too few whites
where
ase began in M' . . .
. .

ISSISS IPPI ,

MEMORANDUM
To: Justice Murray
From: Ella Fitzgerald, law clerk
Until school segregation ended, southern blacks could attend only all-black colleges.
Now they are free to apply to previously all-white colleges, and these schools are
integrated. But the traditional black colleges still exist, and very few whites apply to
them . In 1992 the Supreme Court held that the state could not solve the problem by
requiring a race-neutral admissions policy.* Now the Court must decide whether a
predominantly black college can receive state support.
Arguments for all-black colleges:
1. These schools have a long tradition that ought to be preserved.
2. Many black students w ill learn better in an all-black environment.
3. African American organizations, in particular the United Negro College Fund, raise
money for these schools.
Arguments against all-black colleges:
1. If the state once required single-race schools, it now has an obligation to dismantle
them .
2. Race is a suspect classification, and no state program that chiefly serves one race can
be allowed.
Your decision:
Allow all-black colleges _ _ _
Ban all-black colleges _ __
* United States v Fordice, 505 U.S. 717 (1992)

The Campaign in the Courts

011 September 25, 1957, troops of the IOIst Airborne Division escorted nine black students into
Little Rock (Arka llsas) Central High School to begin its integration .

• Implementation The Brown case involved a
class-action suit; that is, it applied not only to Lind a
Brown but to all others simil arly situated. This
mea nt that black children everywhere now had the
right to attend form erly a ll-white schoo ls. This
change would be one of the most far-reaching and
conflict-provoking eve nts in modern American history. It could not be effected overnight or by the
stroke of a pen. In 1955 the Supreme Co urt decided
that it would let loca l federal district courts oversee
the end of segregation by giving them the power to
approve or disapprove local desegregation plans. This
was to be don e "with a ll deliberate speed. " 13
In the South "all deliberate speed" turned out to
be a snail's pace. Massive resistance to desegregation
broke out in many states. Some communities simply
defied the Co urt; some sought to evade its edict by
closing their publi c schools. In 1956 over one hundred southern members of Co ngress signed a
"Southern Manifesto" that condemned the Brown
decision as an "abuse of judicial power" and pledged
to "use all lawful means to bring about a reversal of
the decision."
In the late 1950s and early 1960s the Nation al
Guard and regular army paratroopers were used to

escort black students into formerly all-white schoo ls
and universities. It was not until the 1970s that
resista nce collapsed and most southern schoo ls were
integrated. The use of armed force convinced people
that res istance was futil e; the disruption of the politics and economy of the South convinced leaders that
it was imprudent; and the voting power of blacks convinced politicians that it was suicidal. In addition. federa l laws began providing financial aid to integrated
schools and withholding it from segregated ones. By
19 70 only 14 percent of southern black schoolchildren stil l attended a ll -black sch ools. 14
• The Rationale As the struggle to impl ement the
Brown decision continued, the importance of the
rationale for that decision became apparent. The case
was decided in a way that surprised many lega l
scholars. The Court could have said that the equalprotection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment
makes the Constitution, and thus state laws, colorblind. Or it cou ld have sa id that the authors of the
Fourteenth Amendment meant to ban segregated
schools. It did neither. Instead it said that segregated
edu cation is bad because it "has a detrimental effect
upon the colored children " by generating "a feeling

131

132

Chapter 6

Civil Rights
gation in schools.16 The Court could not eas ily base its
decision on a constitutional provision that had, at
best, a n uncertain applica ti on to schools. The other
reason grew out of the first. On so important a matter
the chief justice wanted to speak for a unanimous
court. Some justices did not agree that the Fourteenth
Amendment made the Constitution color-blind. In
the interests of harmony the Court found an ambiguous ration a le for its decision .

III 1963 Governor George Wn llnce of Alabnnw stood ill the doorway of the University of Ain/mll/n to block tile elltru of black studellts. 1:acillg hilll is US. Deputu Attorney Gellemi Nie/wins
Katzell/me/I.
of inferiority as to their status in the co mmunity"
that may "affect their hea rts a nd minds in a way
unlikely ever to be undone."15 This conclusion was
supported by a footnote reference to social science
studies of the apparent impact of segregation on
black children.
Why did the Court rely on social science as much
as or more than the Constitution in supportin g its
decision? Apparently for two reasons. One was the
justices' realization that the authors of the Fourteenth Amendment may not have intended to outlaw
segregated schools. The schools in Wa shington, D.C.,
were segregated when the amendment was proposed.
and when this fact was mentioned during the debate,
it seems to have been made clear that the a mendment
was not designed to abolish this segregation. When
Congress debated a civil rights act a few years later, it
voted down provisions that would have ended segrede jure segregation Racial segregation that is
required by law.
de facto segregation Racial segregation that
occurs in schools, not as a result of the law, but
as a result of patterns of residential settlement.

• Desegregation Versus Integration That ambiguity led to the third issue. If separate schools were
inherently uneq ual. what would "unseparate"
schools look like? Since the Court had not said that
race was irrelevant, an "unseparate" school could be
either one that blacks and whites were free to attend
if they chose or one that blacks a nd whites in fact
attended whether they wanted to or not. The first
might be called a deseg regated school, the latter an
integrated school. Think of the Topeka case. Was it
enough that there was now no barrier to Linda
Brown's attending the white school in her neighborhood ? Or was it necessary that there be black children (if not Linda. then some others) actua lly going
to th at school together with white children?
As long as the main impact of the Brown decision
lay in the South, where laws had prevented blacks
from attend ing white schoo ls. this question did not
seem importa nt. Segregation by law (de jure segregation) was now clearly unconstitutional. But in the
North laws had not kept blacks a nd whites apart;
instead a ll -b lack a nd all-white schoo ls were the
result of res idential segregation. preferred livin g
patterns. informal social forces, and administrative
practices (s uch as drawing school district lines so as
to produce single-race schools). This was often called
segregation in fa ct (de facto segregation).
In 1968 the Supreme Court settled the matter. In
New Kent County, Virginia, the school board had created a "freedom-of-choice" plan under which every
pupil wou ld be a llowed without lega l restriction to
attend the school of hi s or her choice. As it turned
out, a ll the white children chose to remain in the allwhite schoo l. and 85 percent of the black children
rema ined in the all-black school. The Court rejected
this pl an as unconstitutional because it did not produce the "ultimate end," which was a "unitary, nonracial system of education." 1 7 In the opinion written
by Justice William Brennan. the Court seemed to be
saying that the Constitution required actual racial

The Campa ign in the Courts

133

mixing in the schools. not just the repeal of laws
requiring racia l separation.
This impression was confirmed three yea rs later
when the Court considered a plan in North Carolina
under whi ch pupils in Mecklenburg Co un ty (which
includes Charlotte) were ass igned to the nearest
neighborhood school without regard to race. As a
result abo ut half the black children now attended
form erly a ll-white sc hoo ls, with the other half
attending a ll-bl ack schoo ls. The fed era l district court
held that th is was inadequate and ordered some children to be bused into more distant schools in order to
achieve a greater degree of integration. The Supreme
Co ur t, now led by Chief Justi ce Wa rren Burger.
upheld the district judge on the gro und s that th e
co urt pla n wa s necessa ry to achi eve a "unitary
school system.,,18
This case-Swallll 11. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board
of Education- pretty much set the guidelines for a ll
subsequ ent cases involving sc hool segregation. The
essenti a l features of those guid elines are as follows:
• To violate the Constitution. a school system. by
law. practice. or regulation. must h ave engaged in
discrimination. Put another way, a pla intiff must
show an intent to discriminate on the part of the
publi c schoo ls.
• The existence of a ll-wh ite or all-bl ack schoo ls in a
district with a history of segregation creates a presumption of intent to discriminate.
• The remedy for past discrimination will not be
lim ited to freedom of choice. or what the Co urt
ca ll ed "th e wa lk-in sc hoo!. " Remedi es may
include racia l quotas in the assignment of teachers and pupils. redrawn district lin es. a nd courtordered busing.
• Not every school must reflect the socia l composition of th e school system as a whol e.
Relying on Swalln. district co urts have super vised
redistricting and busing pla ns in localities all over the
nation. often in the face of bitter opposition from the
co mmunity. In Boston the control of the city schools
by a federa l judge. W. Arthur Gar rity, lasted for more
than a decade and involved him in every aspect of
school administration.
One maj or iss ue not settled by Swann was whether
busing and other remedies should cut ac ross city and
co unty li nes. In some pla ces the centra l-city schools
had become virtually a ll black. Racial integ ration
co uld be achi eved only by brin ging bl ack pupils to

Antibusillg protesters buried (I sciiool bus (unoccupied) to dramatize their cause.
whi te suburban schools or moving white pup ils into
central-city schoo ls. In a series of split-vote decisions
the Court rul ed that court-ordered intercity busing
co uld be authorized on ly if it could be demonstrated
that the suburban areas as well as the central city
had in fact practiced school segregation. Where that
co uld not be shown. such intercity busing would not
be required. The Court was not pers uaded that intent
had been proved in Atlanta. Detro it, Denver. Indianapolis. a nd Richmond. but it was persuaded that it
had been proved in Louisvill e a nd Wilmington.19
The importance that the Co urt attaches to intent
means that if a school system that was once integrated becomes a ll black as a result of whites ' moving to the suburbs. the Court will not require that
district li nes constantly be redrawn or new busing
plans adopted to adjust to the changing di stribution

134

Chapte r 6

Civil Rights

LANDMARK CASES
Civil Rights
• Plessy v. Ferguson (1896): Upheld separate-but-equal facilities for white and black people
on railroad cars.
• Brown v. Board of Education (1954): Said that separate public schools are inherently
unequal, thus starting racial desegregation .
• Green v. County School Board of New Kent County (1968): Banned a freedom -of-choice
plan for integrating schools, suggesting that blacks and whites must actually attend
racially mixed schools.
• Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education (1971): Approved busing and
redrawing district lines as ways of integrating public schools.

of the population. 2o This in turn mea ns that as long
as blacks and whites live in different neighborhoods
for whatever reason, there is a good chance that
some schools in both areas will be heavily of one
race. If mandatory bus ing or other integration measures cause whites to move out of a city at a faster rate
than they otherwise would (a process often called
"white flight"), then efforts to integrate the schools
may in time create more single-race schools. Ultimately integrated schools wil l exist only in integrated neighborhoods or where the quality of education
is so high that both blacks and whites want to enro ll
in the schoo l even at some cost in terms of travel and
inconvenience.
Mandatory busing to achieve racial integration
has been a deeply controversial program and has
generated considerable pu blic opposition. Surveys
show that a majority of people oppose it. 21 As recently as 1992 a poll showed that 48 percent of whites in
the Northeast and 53 percent of southern whites felt
that it was "not the business" of the federa l government to ensure "that black and white children go to
the same schools."22 Presidents Nixon, Ford. and
Reagan opposed busing: all three supported legislation to prevent or reduce it, and Reagan petitioned
the courts to reconsider busing plans. The courts
refused to reconsider, and Congress has passed only
minor restrictions on busing.
The reason why Congress has not followed pub lic
opinion on this matter is complex. It has been torn
between the desire to support civil rights and uphold

the courts and the des ire to represent the views of its
constituents. Because it faces a dilemma. Congress
has taken both sides of the issue simultaneously. By
the late 1980s busing was a dying issue in Congress.
in part because no meaningful legislation seemed
possib le a nd in part because popular passion over
bus ing had somewh at abated .
Then, in 1992, the Supreme Court made it easier
for loca l school systems to reclaim control over their
schools from the courts. In DeKa lb County. Georgia
(a suburb of Atlanta), the schools had been operating under court-ordered desegregation plans for
many years. Despite this effort full integration had
not been achieved, largely beca use the county's
neighborhoods had increasingly become either all
black or all white. The Court held that the local
schools could not be held responsible for segregation
caused solely by segregated living patterns and so the
courts would have to relinquish their control over
the schools. 23

'*

The Campaign in Congress

The campaign in the courts for desegregated schools.
though slow and costly, was a carefully managed effort
to alter the interpretation of a constitutional provision.
But to get new civil rights laws out of Congress required
a far more diIHcult and decentra lized strategy. one that
was aimed at mobilizing public opinion and overcoming the many congressional barriers to action.

Tile Campaign ill COl1gress

III 1960 black students frolll North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College staged the first
"sit-in " wlzell they were refused service at a lunch counter in Greensboro (left). Twenty years
later graduates of the college returned to the sall1e lunch counter (right). Though prices had risen,
the service !/ad ill1proved.

The first problem was to get civil rights on the
political agenda by convincing people that something had to be done. This could be achieved by
dramatizing the problem in ways that tugged at the
conscience of whites who were not racist but were
ordinarily indifferent to black problems. Brutal
lynchings of blacks had shocked these whites, but
lynchings were becoming less frequent in the 19 50s,
and obviously black leaders had no desire to provoke
more lynchings just to get sympathy for their cause.
Those leaders could, however, arrange for dramatic
confrontations between blacks claiming some obvious
right and the whites who denied it to them. Beginning
in the late 19 50s these confrontations began to occur
in the form of sit-ins at segregated lunch counters and
"freedom rides" on segregated bus lines. At about the
same time, efforts were made to get blacks registered to
vote in counties where whites had used intimidation
and harassment to prevent it.
The best-known campaign occurred in 19551956 in Montgomery, Alabama, where blacks, led by
a young minister named Martin Luther King, Jr.,
boycotted the local bus system alter it had a black
woman. Rosa Parks, arrested because she refused to
surrender her seat on a bus to a white man.
These early demonstrations were based on the
philosophy of civil disobedien ce- that is, peacefully violating a law. such as one requiring blacks to ride
in a segregated section of a bus, and allowing oneself
to be arrested as a resu lt.

But the momentum of protest, once unleashed,
cou ld not be centra lly directed or confined to nonviolent action. A rising tide of anger, especia lly among
younger blacks, resulted in the formation of more
militant organizations and the spontaneous eruption
of violent demonstrations and riots in dozens of
cities across the country. From 1964 to 1968 there
were in the North as well as the South four "long. hot
summers" of racial violence.
The demonstrations and rioting succeeded in getting civil rights on the national political agenda, but
at a cost: many whites, opposed to the demonstrations or appalled by the riots , dug in their heels and
fought against making any concessions to "lawbreakers, " "troublemakers, " and "rioters." In 1964
and again in 1968 over two-thirds of the whites
interviewed in opinion polls said that the civil rights
movement was pushing too fast, had hurt the black
cause. and was too violent. 24
In short, there was a conflict between the agendasetting and coa lition-building aspects of the civil
rights movement. Th is was especially a prob lem since
conservative southern legislators still contro lled
many key congressional committees that had for

civil disobedie n ce

Opposing a law one considers unjust by peacefully disobey ing it and
accepting th e resultant punishment.

135

136

Chapter 6
Figure 6.1

Changing White Attitudes Toward Differing Levels of School Integration
Few blac k

-

Civil Rights

-

Half black

-

Majority blac k

100
c:::

0

:;::;

ro

""

2c::: 80
'0

~

-'

-./"'""

==

Vl
Cl)

~

on
Cl)

"C

60

Cl)

~
"onc:::
"-g

40

Cl)

u
u

ro

Cl)

on

2c::: 20
Cl)

l:'
Cl)

CL

1958

1961

1964

1967

1970

1973

1976

1979

1982

1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

Source: Reprinted by permission of the publishing from Racial Attitudes in America by Howard Schuman, Cha rlotte Steeh, and Law rence
Bobo, p. 69 , Cam bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Copyright © 1985, 1997, by the Presidents and Fellows of Harva rd College.

years been the graveyard or civil rights legislation.
The Senate Judiciary Committee was dominated by a
coa lition or southern Democrats and conservative
Republica ns, and the House Rules Committee was
under the control of a chairman hostile to civil rights
bills, Howard Smith of Virginia. Any bill that passed
the House raced an almost certain filibuster in the
Senate. Finally, President John F. Kennedy was reluctant to submit strong civil rights bills to Congress.
Four developments made it possible to break the
deadlock. First, public opinion was changing. As Figure 6.1 shows, the proportion of whites who said that
they were Willing to have their children attend a school
that was hair black increased sharply (though the proportion of whites willin g to have their children attend
a school that was predominantly black increased by
much less) . About the sa me cha nge could be found in
attitudes toward allowing blacks equa l access to hotels
a nd buses. 25 Of course support in principle ror these
civil rights measures was not necessarily the same as
support in practice; nonetheless, there clearly was
occurring a major shift in popular approval of at least
the principles of civiJ rights. At the leading edge or this
chan ge were young, college-educated people. 26

Seco nd , certa in violent reactions by white segregationists to black demonstrators were vivid ly portrayed by the media, especia lly telev ision, in ways
that gave to the civil rights ca use a powerfu l moral
force. In May 1963 the head of the Birmingham
pol ice, Eugene "Bull" Connor. ordered his men to use
attack dogs and high-pressure ftre hoses to repulse a
peaceful march by African Americans demanding
deseg regated public facilitie s and increased job
opportunities. The pictures of that confrontation
(such as the one on page 1 3 7) created a national sensation and contributed greatly to the massive participation . by whites and blacks a like. in the "March on
Washington " that summer. About a quarter of a million people gathered in rront or the Linco ln Memorial to hear Martin Luther King . Jr.. deliver a stirring
and widely hailed address. often ca lled the "I Have a
Dream" speech. The rollowing summer in eshoba
County, Mississippi, three young civil rights workers
(two white and one black) were bruta lly murdered by
Klansmen aided by the local sheriff. When the FBI
identified the murderers, the effect on national public opinion was galva nic; no wh ite southern leader
could any longer offer pers ua sive opposition to red-

The Campaign ill Congress

This picture of II police dog IUllgillg at a black /IIall during a
racial del1lollstratioll ill Binllillg/lal1l, Alabama, ill May
1963 was olle of tire most illjluelltia/Ilews photoyraphs
ever pulJlis/led, It was widely reprillted throughout the
world alld was frequently referred to ill congressiolla/
deiJates 0 11 tile civil rig/Its IJiII of 1964,

era l laws protecting voting rights when white law
en forcement officers had killed students working to
protect those rights, And the next year a white
woman. Viola Liuzzo, was shot and killed while drivin g a car used to transport civil rights workers. Her
death was the subj ect of a presidenti al address.
Third, President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas. Texas, in November 1963. Many people
originally (and wrongly) thought that he had been
killed by a right-wing conspiracy. Even after the
assassin had been ca ught and shown to have leftwing associations. the shock of the president's murder-in a so uthern city- helped build support for
elTorts by the new president, Lyndon B. Johnson
(him self a Texan), to obta in passage of a strong civi l
rights bill as a memorial to the slain president.
Fourth, the 1964 elections not only returned
Johnson to office with a landslide victory but also
sent a huge Democratic majority to the House and

retained the large Democratic margin in the Senate.
This made it possible for northern Democrats to outvote or outmaneuver southerners in the House.
The cumulative effect of these forces led to the
enactment of five civil rights laws between 1957 and
1968. Three (1957, 1960, and 1965) were chiefly
directed at protecting the right to vote; one (1968)
was aimed at preventing di scrimin ation in housing;
and one (1964) . the most far-reaching of all, dealt
with voting, employment, schooling, and public
accommodations.
The passage of the 1964 act was the high point of
the leg islative struggle. Liberals in the House had
drafted a bipartisan bill, but it was now in the House
Rul es Committee, where such matters had often disappeared without a trace. In the wake of Kennedy 's
murder a discharge petition was filed, with President
Johnson's support, to take the bill out of committee
and bring it to the floor of the House. But the Rules
Committee, without waiting for a vote on the petition
(which it probably realized it would lose) , sent the bill
to the floor, where it passed overwhelmingly. In the
Senate an agreement between Republican minority leader Everett Dirksen and President Johnson
smoothed the way for passage in several important
respects. The House bill was sent directly to the Senate floor, thereby bypassing the so uthern-dominated
Judiciary Committee. Nineteen southern senators
began a n eight-week filibu ster against the bill. On
June 10. 19 64, by a vote of seventy-one to twentynine. cloture was invoked and the filibuster endedthe first time in history that a filibu ster aimed at
bl ocking civil rights legisl ation had been broken.
Since the 1960s co ngressional support for civil
rights legislation has grown-so much so, indeed,
that labeling a bill a civ il rights measure, once the
kiss of death, now almost guarantees its passage. For
example, in 1984 the Supreme Court decided that
th e federal ba n on discrimination in ed ucation
applied only to the "program or activity" receiving
federal aid and not to the entire school or university. 27 In 1988 Congress passed a bill to overturn this
decision by making it clear th at antidiscrimination
rules applied to the entire educational institution and
not just to that part (say, the physics lab) receiving
federal money. When President Reagan vetoed the
bill (beca use, in his view, it would diminish the freedom of church-affiliated schools), Congress overrode
the veto. In the override vote every southern Democrat in the Senate and almost 90 percent of those

137

138

Chapter 6

Civil Rights

Key Provisions of Major Civil Rights laws
1957

1960

1964

1965

Voting Made it a federal crinle to try
to prevent a person from voting in a federal election. Created the Civil Rights
Commission.
Voting Authorized the attorney genera l
to appoint federal referees to gather evidence and make findings about allegations that African Americans were being
deprived of their right to vote. Made it a
federal crime to use interstate commerce
to threaten or carry out a bombing.
Voting Made it more difficult to use
devices such as literacy tests to bar
African Americans from voting.
Public accommodations Barred discrimination on grounds of race. color. religion. or national origin in restaurants.
hotels. lunch counters. gasoline stations.
movie theaters. stadiums. arenas. and
lodging houses with more than five rooms.
Schools Authorized the attorney general to bring su it to force the desegregation
of public schools on behalf of citizens.
Employment Outlawed discrimination
in hiring. firing. or paying employees on
grounds of race. color. religion. nationa l
origin. or sex.
Federal funds Barred discrimination in
any activity receiving federal assistance.
Voter registration Authorized appointment by the Civil Service Conmlission of
voting exalTliners who would require registration of all eligible voters in federal.

in the House voted for the bill. This wa s a dramatic
change from 1964. when over 80 percent of the
southern Democrats in Congress voted aga inst the
Civil Rights Act (see Fi gure 6.2 ).
This change partly refl ected the growing political
strength of southern blacks. In 1960 less than onethird of voting-age blacks in the South were reg istered to vote; by 1971 more than half were. and by
1984 two-thirds were. In 2001 over nine thou sa nd
blacks held elective offi ce (see Tab le 6.1 ). But th is was

1968

1972

1988

1991

state. and loca l elections. general or primary. in areas where discrimination was
found to be practiced or where less than
50 percent of voting-age residents were
registered to vote in the 1964 eJection.
The law was to have expired in 1970. but
Congress extended it; it wi ll expire in
2007.
Literacy tests Suspended use of literacy tests or other devices to prevent
African Americans from voting.
Housing Banned. by stages. discrimination in sale or rental of most housing
(excluding private owners who sell or
rent their homes without the services of
a real-estate broker).
Riots Made it a federal crime to use interstate commerce to organize or incite a
riot.
Education Prohibited sex discrimination in education programs receiving federal aid.
Discrimination If any part of an organization receives federal aid. no part of
that organization may discriminate on
the basis of race. sex. age. or physical
handicap.
Discrimination Made it easier to sue
over job discrimination and collect damages; overturned certain Supreme Court
decisions. Made it illegal for the government to adjust. or "norm ." test scores
by race.

only half of the story. Attitudes among white political elites and members of Congress had also
cha nged. This was evid ent as early as 1968. when
Congress passed a law barring discrimination in
housing even though polls showed that only 3 5 percent of the public supported the measure.
Civil ri ghts is not an issue easi ly confined to
schools. housing, and jobs. Sometimes it is extended
to crime. Wh en crack cocaine became a popular
drug, it was cheap and easily sold on street corners.

WOl11e11al1d ECJual Rights

Figure 6.2

•

139

Growing Support Among Southern Democrats
in Congress for Civil Rights Bills

House

•

Senate

100

:0

75

OJ)

c:

~

Q.
Q.

:::J
</)

50

Cl!

OJ)

ro

C

Cl!

U

0;

a..

25

1957

President Lyndon Johnson congmtulntes Rev. Marti n Luther
King, J,:, ajter signing the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

When the public demanded that the police get tough
on crack dealers, arrests fo llowed . Since the great
majority of arrested dealers were black, there was a
sharp increase in black drug dealers going to prison .
Some blacks claimed that they were being singled out
by the police because of their race. The Supreme
Cour t disagreed, holding that no ev idence had been
presented to show that drug dea lers of other races
had not been prosecuted.28

Racial Profiling
If law enforcement au thorities are more likely to
stop a nd qu estion peop le beca use of their race or
ethni city, racia l profiling occurs. At first glance this
would seem to be a bad idea. For exa mple, African
America ns often co mplain that they are stopped by
the police for "driving while black." This complaint
became a national issue in 1998 when the governor
of New Jersey fired the head of the state police for
say ing that blacks were stopped more frequently
than wh ites because they broke the law more frequently. Soon President Clinton a nd later President
Bush made statements condemning racial profiling.
But there is another side to this iss ue. Perhaps
peop le of a certain race are more likely to break the
speed limit or smuggle drugs in their cars; if that is
the case, then stopping them more freq uently, even if
it mea ns stopping more innocent peop le, may make
sense. A study of police stops in Oakland. California.

1960

1964

1965

1968

1970

1988

1991

Civi l-rights bills
Sources: Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation, vols. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8.

by the RAND Corporation showed that. at least in
that city, officers stopped ca rs without knowing the
race of the occupants because the share of blacks
stopped at night, when the drivers could not been
seen, was the same as the share stopped during the
day when they could be seen. 29
The terrorist attacks of 9 / 11 added a new dim ension to the issue. If youn g Midd le Eastern men are
more likely to smuggle weapons onto a irplanes,
searching them more carefully than one searches an
elderly white Ca ucas ian woman may make sense.
But federal officials are leery of doing anything that
might get them labeled as "racial profi lers."

"* Women and Equal Rights
The politica l and legal efforts to secure civil rights for
Afri ca n Americans were accompanied by effor ts to
expa nd the rights of women. There was a n important difference between the two movements, however: whereas African Americans were a rguing against
a legal tradition that explicitly aimed to keep them in
a subservien t status, women had to argue against
a tradition that claimed to be protecting them.
For exampl e, in 1908 the Supreme Co urt upheld a n
Oregon law that limited fema le laundry workers to a

140

Chapter 6

Civil Rights

Office

1970

1991

2001

Co ngress a nd state legislatu res
City and count y off ices
Ju dges an d she riffs
Boards of ed ucati o n
Tota l

182
715
213
362
1,472

476
4,493
847
1, 629
7,445

633
5,456
1,044
1,928
9,061

Sources.' Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2003, Table 417.

ten-hour workday against the claim that it violated
the Fourteenth Amendment. The Court justified its
decision with this language:
The two sexes differ in structure of body, in the
functions to be performed by each, in the
amount of physical strength. in the capacity for
long-continued labor, particularly when done
standing .... the self-reliance which enables one
to assert full rights, and in the capacity to maintain the struggle for subsistence. This difference
justifies a difference in legisldlion and upholds
that which is designed to compensate for some
of the burdens which rest upon her. 30
The origin of the movement to give more rights to
women was probably the Seneca Falls Convention
held in 1848. Its leaders began to demand the right
to vote for women. Though this was slowly granted
by several states, especially in the West. it was not
until 19 20 that the Nineteenth Amendment made it
clear that no state may deny the right to vote on the
basis of sex. The great change in the status of
women, however. took place during World War II
when the demand for workers in our defense plants
led to the employment of millions of women, such
as "Rosie the Riveter," in jobs they had rarely held
before. After the war. the feminist movement took
flight with the publication in 1963 of The Femilline
Mystique by Betty Friedan.
Congress responded by passing laws that required
equal pay for equal work, prohibited discrimination
on the basis of sex in employment and among students in any school or university receiving federal
funds . and banned discrimination against pregnant
women on the job. 3 1
At the same time, the Supreme Court was altering
the way it interpreted the Constitution. The key pas-

Though I1lOIlY wOl11enhave enlisted ill the arllled/orees, the
Suprcll Le Court in 198 I held that Congress could exclude
wall I ell Ji-Olll the droJt.

sage was the Fourteenth Amendment, which prohibits any state from denying to "any person" the
"equal protection of the laws." For a long time the
traditional standard, as we saw in the 1908 case, was
a kind of protective paternalism. By the early 19 70s,
however, the Court had changed its mind. In deciding whether the Constitution bars all, some, or no
sexual discrimination, the Court had a choice
between two standards. The first is the reasonableness
standard. This says that when the government treats
some classes of people differently from others- for
example, applying statutory rape laws to men but
not to women-the different treatment must be reasonable and not arbitrary. The second is the strict
scrutiny standard. This says that some instances of
drawing distinctions between different groups of
people- for example, by treating whites and blacks

Women and Equal Rights
differently- are inherently suspect; thus the Court
will subject them to strict scrutiny to ensure that
they are clearly necessary to attain a legitimate state
goal.
When women complained that some laws treated
them unfairly. the Court adopted a standard somewhere between the reasonableness and strict scrutiny tests. Thus a law that treats men and women
differently must be more than merely reasonable. but
the allowable differences need not meet the strict
scrutiny test.
And so in 1971 the Court held that an Idaho
statute was unconstitutional because it required that
males be preferred over females when choosing people to administer the estates of deceased children. To
satisfy the Constitution. a law treating men and
women differently "must be reasonable. not arbitrary. and must rest on some ground of difference
having a fair and substantial relation to the object of
legislation so that all persons similarly circumstanced sha ll be treated alike." 32 In later decisions
some members of the Court wanted to make classifications based on sex inherently suspect and subject
to the strict scrutiny test, but no majority has yet
embraced this position. 33
But sexual classifications can also be judged by a
different standard. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits sex discrimination in the hiring. firing. and
compensation of employees. The 1972 Civil Rights
Act bans sex discrimination in local education programs receiving federal aid . These laws apply to private and not just government action.
Over the years the Court has decided many cases
involving sexual classification. The following lists
provide severa l examples of illegal sexual discrimination (violating either the Constitution or a civil rights
act) and lega l sexua l distinctions (viol ating neither).
•

Illegal Discrimination

• A state cannot set different ages at which men and
women legally become adults. 34
• A state cannot set different ages at which men and
women are allowed to buy beer. 35
• Women cannot be barred from jobs by arbitrary
height and weight requirements. 36
• Employers cannot require women to take mandatory pregnancy leaves. 37
• Girls cannot be barred from Little League baseball
teams.38

Business and service clubs. such as the Junior
Chamber of Commerce and Rotary Club. cannot
exclude women from membership. 39
• Though women as a group live lon ger than men.
an employer must pay them monthly retirement
benefits equal to those received by menY)
• High schools must pay the coaches of girls' sports
the same as they pay the coaches of boys' sports. 41
•

Decisions Allowing Differences Based on Sex

• A law that punishes males but not females for
statutory rape is permissible; men and women are
not "similarly situated" with respect to sexual
relations. 42
• All-boy and all-girl public schools are permitted if
enrollment is voluntary and quality is equal. 43
• States can give widows a property-tax exemption
not given to widowers. 44
• The navy may allow women to remain officers
longer than men without being promoted. 45
The lower federal courts have been especially busy
in the area of sexual distinctions. They have sa id that
public taverns may not cater to men only and that
girls may not be prevented from competing against
boys in noncontact high school sports; on the other
hand. hospitals may bar fathers from the delivery
room. Women may continue to use their maiden
names after marriage. 46
In 1996 the Supreme Court ruled that women
must be admitted to the Virginia Military Institute.
until then an all -male state-supported co llege that
had for many decades supplied what it ca lled an
"adversative method" of training to instill physical
and mental discipline in cadets. In practical terms
this meant being very tough on students. The Court
said that for a state to justify spending tax money on
a single-sex school. it must supply an "exceedingly
persuasive justification" for excluding the other gen der. Virginia countered by offering to support an allfemale tra ining course at another college. but this
was not enough.4 7 This decision came close to
imposing the strict scrutiny test. and so it has raised
important questions about what could happen to allfemale or traditionally black colleges that accept
state money.
Perhaps the most far-reaching cases defining the
rights of women have involved the draft and abortion. In 1981 the Court held in Rostker v. Goldberg
that Congress may require men but not women to

141

142

Chapter 6

Civ il Rights

LANDMARK CASES
Women's Rights
• Reed v. Reed (1971): Gender discrimination violates the equal protection clause of the
Constitution .
• Craig v. Boren (1976): Gender discrimination can only be justified if it serves "important
governmental objectives" and be " substantially related to those objectives."
• Rostker v. Goldberg (1981): Congress can draft men without drafting women .
• United States v. Virginia (1996): State may not finance an all -male military school.

register for the draft without violating the dueprocess clause of the Fifth Amendment. 48 In the area
of national defense the Court will give great deference
to congressional policy (Congress had already decided
to bar women from combat roles). For many years
women could be pilots and sailors but not on combat
aircraft or combat ships. In 199 3 the secretary of
defense opened air and sea combat positions to all persons regardless of gender; only ground-troop combat
positions are still reserved for men. The issue played a
role in preventing the ratification of the Equa l Rights
Amendment to the Constitution, because of fears that
it would reverse Rostker v. Goldberg.

Sexual Harassment
When Paula Corbin Jones accused President Clinton
of sexual harassment, the judge threw the case out of
court because she had not submitted enough evidence such that, if the jury believed her story, she
would have made a legally adequate argument that
she had been sexually harassed.
What. then, is sexual harassment? Drawing on rulings by the Equal Employment Opportunities Commission. the Supreme Court has held that harassment can
take one of two forms . First. it is il legal for someone to
request sexual favors as a condition of employment or
promotion. This is the "quid pro quo " ru le. If a person
does this, the employer is "strictly liable." Strict liability means that the employer can be found at fault even
if he or she did not know that a subordinate was
requesting sex in exchange for hiring or promotion.

police powers State power to effect laws promoting health, safety, and morals.

Second. it is illegal for an employee to experience a
work environment that has been made hostile or intimidating by a steady pattern of offensive sexual teasing,
jokes, or obscenity. But employers are not strictly liable
in this case; they can be found at fault on ly if they were
"negligent"-that is, they knew about the hostile environment but did nothing about it.
In 1998 the Supreme Court decided three cases
that made these rules either better or worse, depending on your point of view. In one it determined that a
school system was not liable for the conduct of a
teacher who seduced a female student because the
student never repor ted the actions. In a second it
he ld that a city was liable for a sexually hostile work
environment confronting a female lifeguard even
though she did not report this to her superiors. In the
third it decided that a female employee who was not
promoted after having rejected the sexual advances
of her boss could recover financia l damages from the
firm. But. it added. the firm could have avoided paying this bill if it had put in place an "affirmative
defense" against sexual exploitation, although the
Court never said what such a policy might be. 49
Sexual harassment is a serious matter, bu t
because there are almost no federal laws governing
it. we are left with somewhat vague and often inconsistent court and bureaucratic rules to guide us.

Privacy and Sex
Regulating sexual matters has traditionally been left
up to the states, which do so by exercising their
police powers. These powers include more than the
authority to create police departments; they include
all laws designed to promote public order and secure
the safety and morals of the citizens. Some have
argued that the Tenth Amendment to the Constitu-

Wo men and Equal Rights

LANDMARK CASES
Privacy and Abortion
• Griswold v. Connecticut (1965): Found a " right to privacy " in the Constitution that would
ban any state law against selling contraceptives.
• Roe v. Wade (1973): State laws against abortion we re unconstitutional.
• Webster v. Reproductive Health Services (1989): Allowed states to ban abortions f rom
public hospitals and permitted doctors to test to see if fetuses were viable.
• Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992): Reaffirmed Roe v. Wade but upheld certain limits on
it s use.
• Stenberg v. Carhart (2000): St ates may not ban partial birth abortions if they fail to allow
an exception to protect the health of t he mother.

tion. by reserving to the states all powers not delegated to the federal government. mea nt that states could
do anythin g not explicitly proh ibited by the Constitution. But that changed when the Supreme Court
bega n expanding the power of Congress over business a nd when it started to view sexual matters
under the newly discovered right to privacy.
Until that point, it had been left up to the states to
decide whether and under what circumstances a
woman could obtain an abortion. For exa mple. New
York allowed abortions during the first twenty-four
weeks of pregnan cy. whi le Texas bann ed it except
when the mother's life was threatened.
That bega n to cha nge in 1965 when the Supreme
Court held that the states could not prevent the
sa le of contraceptives beca use by so doing it would
invade a "zone of privacy." Privacy is nowhere mentioned in the Constitution. but the Court argued that
it cou ld be inferred from "penumbra s" (litera lly.
shadows) cast off by various provisions of the Bill of
Rights. 50
Eight years later the Court, in its famous Roe v.
Wade decision, held that a "right to privacy" is "broad
enough to encompass a woman's decision whether
or not to terminate a pregnancy."5 1 The case, which
began in Texas, produced this view: during the first
three months (or trimester) of pregnancy. a woman
has an unfettered right to an abortion. During the
second trimester. states may regulate abortions but
only to protect the moth er's health. In the third
trimester. states might ban abortions.

In reaching this decision. the Court denied that it
was trying to decide when human li fe began- at the
moment of conception. at the moment of birth. or
somewhere in between. But that is not how critics of
the decision saw things. To them life begins at conception, and so the human fetus is a "person " entitled to the equ al protection of the laws guaranteed by
the Fourteenth Amendment. People feeling th is way
began to use the slogans "right to life" and "pro-life. "
Supporters of the Court's action saw matters differently. In their view. no one ca n say for certa in when
human life begins; what one can say. however. is that
a woman is entitled to choose whether or not to have
a baby. These peop le too k the slogans "right to
choose" a nd "pro-choice."
Almost immediately the congression al allies of
pro-life groups introduced constitutiona l a mendments to overturn Roe v. Wade. bu t none passed
Congress. Nevertheless. abortion foes did persuade
Congress. beginning in 1976. to bar the use of federal funds to pay for abortions except when the life of
the mother is at stake. This provision is known as the
Hyde Amendment. after its spo nsor. Representative
Henry Hyde. The chief effect of the amendment has
been to deny the use of Medicaid fund s to pay for
abortions for low-income women.
Despite pro-life opposition. the Supreme Court for
sixteen yea rs steadfastly reaffirmed and even broadened its decision in Roe v. Wade. It struck down laws
req uirin g. before an abortion could be performed. a
woma n to have the consent of her husband . an

143

144

Chapter 6

Civil Rights

"emancipated" but underage girl to have the consent
of her parents. or a woman to be advised by her doctor as to the facts about abortion. 52
But in 1989. under the influence of justices
appointed by President Reagan. it began in the Webster case to uphold some state restrictions on abortions. When that happened. many people predicted
that in time Roe v. Wade wou ld be overturned. especially if President H. W. Bush was able to appoint
more justices. He appo inted two (Souter and
Thomas) . but Roe survived. The key votes were cast
by Justices O·Connor. Souter. and Kennedy. In 1992.
in its Casey decision. the Court by a vote of five to four
explicitly refused to overturn Roe. declaring that
there was a right to abortion. At the same time. however. it upheld a variety of restrictions imposed by the
state of Pennsylvania on women seeking abortions.
These included a mandatory twenty-four-hour
waiting period between the request for an abortion
and the performance of it. the requirement that
teenagers obtain the consent of one parent (or. in
special circumstances. of a judge). and a requirement that women contemplating an abortion be
given pamphlets about alternatives to it. Similar
restrictions had been enacted in many other states.
all of which looked to the Pennsylvania case for
guidance as to whether they could be enforced. In
allowing these restrictions. the Court overruled some
of its own earlier decisions. 53 On the other hand. the
Court did strike down a state law that would have
required married women to obtain the consent of
their husbands before having an abortion.
In 2000 the Court visited abortion again. and by
another flve-to-four vote refused to allow states to ban
so-called partial birth abortions. This method is usually done to fetuses that are at least twenty weeks old.
With the right to an abortion again politically
secure. the struggle over its implementation took a
new turn. Antiabortion activists conducted demonstrations at many abortion clinics. and a fewextremists wounded or killed some abortion doctors. This
Programs designed to
increase minority participation in some institution (businesses, schools, labor unions, or government agencies) by taking positive steps to
appoint more minority-group members.
equality of result Making certain that people
achieve the same result.

affirmative action

led to a demand for laws protecting the clinics. Laws
were passed and court orders issued. designed to
strike a balance between the activists' right to protest
and the clinics' right to operate.
In 1997 the Supreme Court upheld lega l orders
that forbid acts of physical obstruction and that
provide a "buffer zone" of fifteen feet around the
entrance to a clinic within which demonstrations
cannot occur. 54
There is one irony in all of this: "Roe." the pseudonym for the woman who started the suit that became
Roe v. Wade. never had an abortion and many years
later. using her real name. Norma McCorvey. became
an evangelical Christian who published a book and
started a ministry to denounce abortions.

~

Affirmative Action

A common thread running through the politics of
civ il rights is the argument between equality of
results and equality of opportunity.

Equality of Results
One view. expressed by most civil rights and feminist
organ izations. is that the burdens of racism and sexism can be overcome only by taking race or sex into
account in designing remedies. It is not enough to
give rights to people; they must be given benefits. If
life is a race. every body must be brought up to the
same starting line (or possibly even to the same finish
line). This means that the Constitution is not and
should not be co lor-blind or sex-neutral. In education this implies that the races must actually be
mixed in the schools. by busing if necessary. In hiring
it means that affirmative action- preferential hiring practices- must be used to find and hire women.
African Americans. and other minorities. Women
sho uld not simply be free to enter the labor force;
they should be given the material necessities (for
example. free daycare) that will help them enter it.
On payday workers' checks should reflect not just the
results of people's competing in the marketplace but
the results of plans designed to ensure that people
earn comparable amounts for comparable jobs. Of
late. affirmative action has been defended in the name
of diversity or multiculturalism- the view that every
institution (llrm. school. or agency) and every co llege
curriculum should reflect the cu ltural (that is. ethnic) diversity of the nation.

Affirmative Action

145

HOW THINGS WORK
Becoming a Citizen
For persons born in the United States, the rights of
U.S. citizenship have been ensured, in constitutional
theory if not in everyday practice, since the passage
of the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868 and the civil
rights laws ofthe 1960s. The Fourteenth Amendment
conferred cit izenship upon "all persons born in the
United States .. . and subject to the jurisdiction
thereof." Subsequent laws also gave citizenship to
children born outside the United States to parents
who are American citizens.
But immigrants, by definition, are not born with
the rights of U.S . citizenship. Instead those seeking to
become U.S. citizens must, in effect, assume certain
responsib ilities in order to become citizens. The
statutory requirements for naturalization, as they
have been broadly construed by the cou rts, a re as
follows :
• Five years' residency, or three years if married to a
citizen .
• Continuous residency since filing of the naturalization petit ion.

Equality of Opportunity
The second view holds that if it is wrong to discriminate against African America ns a nd women, it is
equ a lly wrong to give them preferentia l treatment
over other groups. To do so co nstitutes r everse di scrimination. The Constitution and laws should be
color-b lind a nd sex-neu tra l. 55 In th is view allowin g
ch ildren to attend the school of their choice is sufficien t: busing them to attain a certain racia l mixture
is wrong. Eliminating barriers to job opportunities is
right; using numerica l ;'targets" a nd ';goa ls" to place
m inorities and women in specifi c jobs is wrong. If
people wish to compete in the ma rket. they shou ld
be satisfied with the market verdict concerni ng the
worth of their work.
These two views a re intertwined with other deep
philosophi ca l differences. Supporters of equality of
opportunity tend to have orthodox beliefs; they
favor letting private groups behave t he way that they
want (a nd so may defend the right of a men 's club to

• Good moral character, which is loosely interpreted
to mean no evidence of criminal activity.
• Attachment to constitut ional princ iples . This
means that potential citizens have to answer basic
factual questions about American government
(e.g ., "Who was the first president of the United
States?") and publ icly denounce any and all allegiance to their native country and its leaders (e.g.,
Italy and the king of Italy), but devotion to consti tutional principles is now regarded as being
implicit in the act of applying for naturalization.
• Being favorably disposed to "the good order and
happiness of the United States." *
Today about 97 percent of aliens who seek citizenship are successful in meeting these requirements and
becoming naturalized citizens of the United States.
* 8 U.s.c. 1423, 1427 (1970); Girouard
(1946)

v. United States, 328 U.S. 61

Source: New York Times (July 25, 1993),33 . Copyright © 1993 by the
New York Times. Reprinted by permission .

exclude women). Su pporters of the opposite view are
li kely to be progressive in their beliefs and in sist that
private clubs meet the same sta nd ards as schoo ls or
busin ess firms. Adherents to the equality-of-opportunity view often attach great importance to traditiona l models of the fa mily a nd so are skeptica l of
daycare a nd federa lly funded abortions. Adherents to
t he eq ua lity-or-results view prefer greater freedom of
choice in lifestyle question s a nd so take the opposite
position on daycare and abortion.
Of course the debate is more complex tha n th is
simple contrast suggests. Take, for exa mple, th e
question of affirmative action . Both the advocates
of equa lity of opportu ni ty a nd those of equa lity of

reverse discrimination Using race or sex to
give preferential treatment to some people.
equality of opportunity Giving people an
equal chance to succeed.

146

Chapter 6

Civil Rights

HOW THINGS WORK

The Rights of Aliens
America is a nation of immigrants. Some have arrived
legally, others illegally. An illegal, or undocumented,
alien is subject to being deported. With the passage
in 1986 of the Immigration Reform and Control Act,
illegal aliens who have resided in this country continuously since before January 1, 1982, are entitled to
amnesty-that is, they can become legal residents.
However, the same legislation stipulated that
employers (who once could hire undocumented
aliens without fear of penalty) must now verify the
legal status of all newly hired employees; if they
knowingly hire an illegal alien, they face civil and
criminal penalties.
Aliens-people residing in this country who are
not citizens- cannot vote or run for office. Nevertheless, they must pay taxes just as if they were citizens. And they are entitled to many constitutional
rights, even if they are in this country illegally. This is
because most of the rights mentioned in the Constitution refer to "people" or "persons," not to "citizens." For example, the Fourteenth Amendment bars
a state from depriving" any person of life, liberty, or
property, without due process of law" or from denying "to any person within its jurisdiction the equal
protection of the laws" [italics added]. As a result,
the courts have held that:

• The First Amendment rights of free speech, religion, press, and assembly and the Fourth Amendment protections against arbitrary arrest and
prosecution extend to aliens as well as to citizens. 4
• Aliens are entitled to own property.

• The children of illegal aliens cannot be excluded
from the public school system. 1
• Legally admitted aliens are entitled to welfare
benefits .2
• Illegal aliens cannot be the object of reprisals if
they attempt to form a labor union where they
work .3

su.s. " Bngnoni-Ponce, 422 U.S. 873 (1975); INS" Delgado, 466 U.S

results might agree that there is something odd
about a factory or university that hires no African
Americans or women, and both might press it to
prove that its hiring policy is fair. Affirmative action
in this case can mean either looking hard for qualifi ed
women and minorities and giving them a fair shot at
jobs or setting a numerical goal for the number of
women a nd minorities that should be hired and

The government can make rules that apply to
aliens only, but they must justify the reasonableness
of the rules. For example:
• The Immigration and Naturalization Service has
broader powers to arrest and search illegal aliens
than police departments have to arrest and search
citizens .s
• States can limit certain jobs, such as police officer
and schoolteacher, to citizens.6
• The president or Congress can bar the employment of aliens by the federal government?
• States can bar aliens from serving on a jury.8
• I"egal aliens are not entitled to obtain a Social
Security card.
, Plyler " Doe, 457 U.S. 202 (1982).
2 Graham " Richardson, 403 U.S. 365 (197 1).

3Sure-Tan" National Labor Relations Board, 467 U.S. 883 (1984).
4Chew" Colding, 344 U.S . 590 (1953)

210 (1984); INS " Lopez-Mendoza, 486 U.S. 1032 (1984).
6Cabell" Chavez-Sa lido, 454 U.S. 432 (1982); Foley " Connelie, 435
U.S. 291 (1978); Amblach lC Norwick, 441 U.S. 68 (1979).
7Hampton

lC

Mow Sun Wong, 436 U.S. 67 (197 6).

8Schneider" New Jersey, 308 U.S. 147 (1939)

insisting that that goal be met. Persons who defend
the second course of action call these goa ls "targets";
persons who criticize that course call them "quotas."
The issue has largely been fought out in the courts.
Between 1978 and 1990 about a dozen major cases
involving affir mative action were decid ed by the
Supreme Court; in about half it was upheld, and in
the other half it was overturned. The different out-

Affir m ative Action

14 7

HOW THINGS WORK
The Rights of the Disabled
In 1990 the federal government passed the Ameri cans with Disabilities Act (ADA), a sweeping law that
extended many of the protections enjoyed by
women and racial minorities to disabled persons.
Who Is a Disabled Person?
Anyone who has a physical or mental impairment
that substantial ly lim its one or more major life activities (for example, holding a job), anyone who has
a record of such impairment, or anyone who is
regarded as having such an impairment is considered
disabled .
What Rights Do Disabled Persons Have?
Employment Disabled persons may not be denied
employment or promotion if, with "reasonable
accommodation, " they can perform the duties of
that job. (Excluded from this protection are people
who currently use illegal drugs, gamble compulsively,
or are homosexual or bisexual.) Reasonable accommodation need not be made if this would cause
"undue hardship " on the employer.
Government Programs and Transportation Disabled persons may not be denied access to government
programs or benefits. New buses, taxis, and trains must

comes reflect two things- the differences in the facts
of the cases and the ar rival on the Court of three justices (Kennedy, O'Connor, and Sca lia) appOinted by a
presiden t, Ronald Reagan , wh o was opposed to at
least the broader interpretation of affIrmative action.
As a result of these decisions, the law governing affirmative action is now complex and confu sing.
Consider one iss ue: should the government be
allowed to use a quota system to select workers, enroll
stud ents, award contracts, or grant licenses? In the
Bakke decision in 1978. the Court sa id that the medica l school of the University of Ca liforni a at Davis
co uld not use a n explicit numerical quota in admitting min ori ty stud ents but co uld "take race into
account. "56 So no numerical quotas, r ight? Wrong.
Two years later the Court upheld a federal rule that
set aside 10 percent of all federa l construction con-

be accessible to disabled persons, including those in
wheelchairs.
Public Accommodations Disabled persons must
enjoy " full and equal" access to hotels, restaurants,
stores, schools, parks, museums, aud itoriums, and the
like. To ach ieve equal access, owners of existing facilities must alter them "to the maxim um extent feasi ble " ; builders of new facil it ies must ensure that they
are readily accessible to disabled persons, unless this
is structurally impossible .
Telephones The ADA directs the Federal Communications Commission to issue regulations to
ensure that telecommunications devices for hearingand speech -impaired people are available "to the
extent possible and in the most efficient manner."
Congress The right s under this law apply to
employees of Cong ress.
Rights Compared The ADA does not enforce th e
rights of disabled persons in the same way as the Civ il
Rights Act enf orces the rights of African Americans
and wom en. Racial or gender discrimination must
end regardless of cost; den ial of access to disabl ed
persons must end unless "undue hardship" or excessive costs would result.

tracts for minority-owned fIrms. 57 All right, maybe
quotas can't be used in medical schools, but they can
be u sed in the construction industry. Not exactly. In
19 89 the Court overturned a Richmond , Virginia,
law that set aside 30 percent of its construction contracts for minority-ow ned firms. 58 Well , maybe the
Court just cha nged its mind between 19 80 a nd 1989 .
No. One year later it upheld a federa l rule that gave
preference to min ority-ow ned firm s in the awarding
of broa dcast licenses. S9 Then in 1993 it upheld the
ri ght of whi te contracto rs to challenge minority setaside laws in Jacksonville, Florid a. 6o
It is too ea rly to try to ma ke sense of these twists
a nd turns, especia lly since a deeply divid ed Court is
still wrestling with these issues a nd Congress (as
with the Civil Rights Act of 199 1) is modifying or
superseding some earlier Cour t decisions. But a few

148

Chapter 6

Civil Rigl1ts

Th e Jederal governll1ent subsidizes some job training programs,
sLich as Jor these medicnl assistants.

general standards seem to be emerging. In simplified
form , they are as follows:
o

o

o

o

o

o

The courts will subj ect any quota system created
by state or loca l govern ments to "strict scru tiny"
and will look for a "compelling" justification for it.
Quotas or preference systems ca nn ot be used by
sta te or loca l govern ments without fi rst showi ng
th at such ru les a re needed to correct a n actu a l
past or present pattern of discrimination.h i
In provi ng that there has been discrimin ation , it is
not enoug h to show that Afri can America ns (o r
other minorities) a re statistically und erreprese nted a mong empl oyees. co ntractors. or union members: you must identify the actua l practices that
have had this discrimin atory impact.(,2
Quotas or preference systems that are created by
Jedemllaw will be given greater deference, in par t
beca use Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment
gives to Congress powers not given to the states to
correct the effects of racial discrimin ation . (,3
It may be easier to justify in court a volun tary
preference system (for example, one agreed to in a
labor-ma nagement contract) th a n one tha t is
req uired by law. h4
Eve n when you ca n justify specia l preferences in
hiring workers, the Su preme Court is not likely to
all ow racia l preferences to govern who gets laid oJT
A worker la id off to make roo m for a min ority
worker loses more than does a worker not hired in
preference to a minori ty applica nt. ('S

Complex as they are. these rulings still generate a
great dea l of passion . Supporters of the decisions bar-

ring certain affirmative action plans ha il these decisions as steps back from a n emergin g pattern of
reverse discrimination . In contrast. civil rights orga nizations have denounced those decisions that have
overturn ed affirm ative action programs. In 1990 th eir
congressional a llies introduced legislation that would
reverse severa l decisions. In particul ar thi s legislation
would put the burden of proof on the employer, not
the employee, to show that the underrepresentation of
minorities in the firm 's work force was the result of
legitimate and necessary business decisions and not
the result of discrimination. If the employer could not
prove this, the aggrieved employee would be able to
collect large damage awards. (In the past, he or she
could coLlect only back pay.) In 199 1 the bill was
passed and was signed by President Bush.
In thinking about these matters. most American s
distinguish between compen satory action and preferentia l treatment. They define compensatory action
as "helpin g disadvantaged people catc h up, u sually
by giving them extra education, training, or services." A majority of the public supports thi s. They
define preferentia l treatment as "givin g minorities
preference in hiring. promotions, co llege admissions,
a nd con tracts . ,. La rge majorities oppose th is.nn These
vi ews refl ect an enduring element in American poli tical culture- a strong commitment to individua li sm
("nobody should get somethin g w ithout deservin g
it") coupled with support for help [or the disadvan taged ("so mebody who is suffering through no fa ult
of his or her own deserves a helping ha nd").
Where does a ffirm ati ve action fit in to thi s culture?
Polls suggest that if a ffir mative action is defined as
"helping." people will support it. but if it is defined as
"using quotas." they will oppose it. On this matter
blacks and whites see things differently. Blacks think
that they should receive preferences in employment
to create a more diverse work force a nd to make up
for past discrimination: whites oppose using goals to
create divers ity or to remedy past ills. In sum the controversy over afftrmative action depends on what you
mea n by it a nd on what yo ur racia l identity is. 67
A sma ll co nstruction compa ny na med Ada ra nd
tried to get a contract to build gua rdra ils a lon g a
hi ghway in Colorado. Though it was th e low bidder.
it lost the co ntract beca use of a government policy
that favors sma ll busin esses own ed by "socia lly a nd
eco nomi ca lly di sa dva ntaged individu a ls"- that is.
by racia l and ethnic minori ties. In a fi ve-to-four decision the Cour t agreed with Adara nd a nd sent the
case back to Colorado for a new tria l.

Gays and the Constitution

LANDMARK CASES

149

.

Affirmative Action
• United Steelworkers v. Weber (1979): Despite the ban on racial classifications in the 1964
Civil Rights Act, this case upheld the use of race in an employment agreement between
the steelworkers union and steel plant.
• Regents of the University of California v. Bakke (1978): In a confused set of rival
opinions, the decisive vote was cast by Justice Powell, who said that a quotalike ban on
Bakke's admission was unconstitutional but that "d iversity" was a legitimate goal that
could be pursued by taking race into account.
• Richmond v. Croson (1989): Affirmative action plans must be judged by the strict scrutiny
standard that requires any race-conscious plan to be narrowly tailored to serve a
compelling interest.
• Grutter v. Bollinger and Gratz v. Bollinger (2003): Numerical benefits cannot be used to
adm it m inor ities into college, but race can be a "plus factor" in making t hose decisions.

The essence of its decision was that any discrimination based on race must be subject to strict scrutiny, even if its purpose is to help, not hurt, a racial
minority. Strict scrutiny means two things:
• Any racial preference must serve a "compelling
government interest."
• The preference must be "narrowly taHored " to
serve that interest. 68
To serve a compelling governmental interest, it is
like ly that any racial preference will have to remedy
a clear pattern of past discrimination. No such pattern had been shown in Colorado.
This decision prompted a good deal of political
debate about affirmative action. In California an initiative was put on the 1996 ba ll ot to prevent state
authorities from using "race, sex, color, ethnicity, or
national origin as a criterion for either discriminating against, or granting preferentia l treatment to,
any individual or group" in public employment, public education, or public contracting. When the votes
were counted, it passed. Washington has a lso adopted a similar measure, and other states are debating it.
But the Adarand case and the passage of the Ca lifornia initiative did not mean that affirmative action
was dead. Though the federal Court of Appeals for
the Fifth Circuit had rejected the affirmative action
program of the University of Texas Law School, 6 9 the
Supreme Court did not take up that case. It waited for

several more years to rule on a similar matter arising from the University of Michigan. In 2003 the
Supreme Court overturned the admissions po licy of
the University of Michigan that had given to every
African American, Hispanic, and Native American
applicant a bonus of 20 points out of the 100 needed to guarantee admission to the University's undergraduate program. 70 This policy was not "narrowly
tailored." In rejecting the bonus system, the Court
reaffirmed its decision in the Bakke case made in
1978 in which it had rejected a university using a
"fixed quota " or an exact numerical advantage to the
exclusion of "ind ividua l" considerations.
But that same day, the Court upheld the policy of
the University of Michigan Law School that used
race as a "plus factor " but not as a numerica l
quota ?l It did so even though using race as a plus
factor increased by threefo ld the proportion of
minority applicants who were admitted. In short,
admitting more minorities serves a "compelli ng state
interest" and doing so by using race as a plus factor is
"narrowly tailored" to achieve that goal.

Gays and the Constitution
At first, the Supreme Court was willing to let states
decide how many rights homosexuals should have.
Georgia, for example, passed a law banning sodomy

150

Chapter 6

Civil Rights

LANDMARK CASES
Gay Rights
• Lawrence v. Texas (2003): State law may not ban sexual relations between same-sex
partners.
• Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000): A private organization may ban gays from its
membership.

(that is, any sexual contact involving the sex organs
of one person and the mouth or anus of another).
Though the law applied to all persons, homosexuals
sued to overturn it. In Bowers v. Hardwick, the
Supreme Court decided , by a five-to-four majority,
that there was no reason in the Constitution to prevent a state from having such a law. There was a
right to privacy, but it was designed simply to protect
"family, marriage, or procreation. "72
But ten years later the Court seemed to take a dil:'
ferent position. The voters in Colorado had adopted a
state constitutional amendment that made it illegal
to pass any law to protect persons based on their
"homosexual, lesbian, or bisexual orientation. " The
law did not pena lize gays and lesbians: instead it said
that they cou ld not become the object of specific legal
protection of the sort that had trad itiona lly been
given to racial or ethnic minorities. (Ordinances to
give specific protection to homosexuals had been
adopted in some Colorado cities.) The Supreme Court
struck down the Colorado constitutional amendment because it violated the equal protection clause
of the fed era l Constitution. 73
Now we fa ced a puzzle: a state can pass a law banning homosexual sex, as Georgia had, but a state
cannot adopt a rule preventing cities from protecting homosexuals, as Co lorado had. The matter was
finally put to rest in 2003. In Lawrence v. Texas, the
Court, again by a five-to-four vote, overturned a
Texas law that banned sexua l contact between
persons of the same sex. The Court repeated the language it had used earlier in cases involving contraception and abortion. If "the right to privacy means
anything, it is the right of the individual, married or
single. to be free from unwanted governmental
intrusion" into sexua l matters. The right of privacy
means the "right to define one's own concept of

existence, of meaning. of the universe, and of the
mystery of human life." It specifically overruled
Bowers v. Hardwick. 74
The Lawrence decision had a benefit and a cost. The
benefit was to strike down a law that was rarely
enforced and if introduced today probably could not
be passed. The cost was to create the possib i lity that
the Court, and not Congress or state legislatures.
might decide whether same-sex marriages were legal.
That same year. the Massachusetts Su preme Jud icial Court decided, by a four-to-three vote. that gays
and lesbians must be allowed to be married in the

Proponents and opponents oj gay marriage conJront one
another inJront oj the Massachusetts Statehollse.

Summary

state. 7 5 The Massachusetts legislature responded by
passing a bill that, if it becomes a state constitutional amendment, will reverse the state court's decision.
But for that to ha ppen. the legis lature must vote
aga in on this matter and so the a mendment could
not take effect until 2006,
The mayor of San Francisco, Gavin Newsom , in
apparent defiance of state law. began issuing marriage licenses to gay and lesbian couples. In August
2004 the Ca lifornia Supreme Court struck down his
actions as inconsistent with existing law.
Public opinion polls suggest that many voters are
opposed to same-sex marriages but would allow
"civil unions " among same-sex couples of the sort
now approved in Vermont. Many states have passed
laws banning same-sex marriages, and in 1996 Congress enacted a bill, signed by President Clinton,

*
T

called the Defense of Marriage Act. Under it, no state
would have to give legal status to a same-sex marriage performed in another state, and it would define
marriage as a lawful union of husband and wife. But
state and federa l laws on this matter could be overturned if the Supreme Court should decide in favor of
same-sex marriage, using language that appears in
the Lawrence case. That could be prevented by an
amendment to the Constitution, but Congress is not
willing to propose one and, if proposed, it is not clear
the states would ratify it.
Private groups , however, ca n exclude homosexuals from their membership. In another five-to-four
decision, the Supreme Court decided that the Boy
Scouts of America could exclude gay men and boys
because that group had a right to determine its own
membership. 76

SUMMARY

he civi l rights movement in the courts and in
Co ngress profoundly changed the nature of
African American pa rticipation in politics by bringing
southern blacks into the political system so that they
could become an effective interest group. The decisive
move was to enlist northern opinion in this cause, a
job made easier by the northern perception that civil
rights involved simply an unfair contest between two
minorities- southern whites and southern blacks.
That perception changed when it became evident that
the court rulings and legislative decisions would apply
to the orth as well as the South, leading to the emergence of northern opposition to court-ordered busing
and affirmative action programs.
By the time this reaction developed, the legal and
political system had been changed suffiCiently to
make it difficult if not impossible to limit the application of civil rights laws to the special circumstances
of the South or to alter by legislative means the decisions of federal co urts. Though the co urts can
accomplish little when they have no political allies
(as revealed by the massive resistance to ea rly schooldesegregation decis ions), they can accomplish a
great deal, even in the face of adverse public opinion,
when they have some organized allies (as revealed by
their ability to withstand antibusing moves).

The feminist movement has paralleled in organization a nd tactics many aspects of the black civil
rights movement, but with important differences.
Women sought to repeal or reverse laws and court
rulings that in many cases were ostensibly designed
to protect rather than subjugate them. The conflict
between protection and liberation was sufficiently
intense to defeat the effort to ratify the Equal Rights
Amendment.
The most divisive civil rights issues in American
politics are abortion and affirmative action. From
1973 to 1989 the Supreme Court seemed committed
to giving constitutional protection to all abortions
within the first trimester; since 1989 it has approved
various state restrictions on the circumstances under
which abortions can be obtained.
There has been a similar shift in the Court's view
of affirmative action. Though it will still approve
some quota plans, it now insists that they pass strict
scrutiny to ensure that they are used only to correct
a proven hi story of discrimination, that they place
the burden of proof on the party alleging discrimination, a nd that they be limited to hiring and not
extended to layoffs. Congress has modified some of
these rulin gs with new civil rights legislation.

151

152

Chapter 6

Civil Rights

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?
1.. Since Congress enacts our laws, why has it not

made certain that all groups have the same rights?
Congress responds to public demands. During much
of our history, people have expected women, African
Americans, Na tive America ns, and many other
groups to be treated differently than are others. The
Bill of Rights is a check on congressional and state
authority; to be effective, it must be enforced by independent co urts.

2. After the Supreme Court ended racial segregation in the schools, what did the president and
Cong ress do?
For a whi le, not much. But in time these institutions
began spending federal money and using federal
troops and law enforcement officials in ways that
greatly increased the rate of integration.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?
1.. If the law supports equality of opportunity, why

2. Under what circumstances can men and women

has afJirmative action become so important?
There are several reasons. If there has been active
discrimination in the past, affirmative action can be
a way to help disadvantaged groups catch up. But the
Supreme Court has also held. though by narrow
majorities, that even when there has not been a legacy of discrimination, pursuing "d iversity" is a "compelling" interest. The real issue is what diversity
means and how best to achieve it.

be treated differently?
A difference in treatment can be justified constitutionally if the difference is fair, reasonable, and not
arbitrary. Sex differences need not meet the "strict
scrutiny" test. It is permissible to punish men for
statutory rape and to bar them from hospital delivery
rooms ; men are different from women in these
respects. Congress may draft men without drafting
women.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

Court cases: www.law.comell.edu
Department of Justice: www.usdoj.gov
Civil rights organizations:
National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People: www.naacp.org
National Organization for Women: www.now.org

National Gay and Lesb ian Task Force:
www.thetaskforce.org
National Council of La Raza: www.nclr.org
American Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee:
www.adc.org
Anti-Defamation League: www.adl.org

SUGGESTED READINGS
Branch, Taylor. Parting the Waters: America in the King Years. New
York: Simon and Schu ster. ] 988. A vivid acco unt of the civil
ri ghts struggle.
Flexner, Eleanor. Century oj Struggle: Th e Warn ell's Hights Movem ent
in the United Stales. Rev. ed. Cambridge: Harvard Un iversity
Press. ] 97 5 . A historica l a ccount or the reminist movement
an d its politi ca l strategies.
Friedan. Betty. Th e Fell1inille My stil/ue. New York: Norton. 19f1 3 .
Te nth a nni ve rsary edilion. ] 974. A well -known ca ll l'or
women to become socially and cu lturally independ ent.
Foreman. Christoph er A. Ti, e Aji"icw I-A lllericwl Predimlllwt. Wa shington . D. C. : Brookin gs In stitulion.1999 . Thoughtfu l essays
on problems faced by Afri ca n Ameri can s today.
Franklin. John Hope. From Slavery to Freedom. 5th cd. New York:
Knopf. ] 9 8 0. A survey of black history in the United States.
Kluger. Richard. Sill1ple Jll stice. New York : l~andom HousclVin tage
Books. ] 977. Detai led and absorbing acco unt of tb e school-

deseg regation iss ue. rrom the Fourteenth Amendment to the
Brown case.
Kull. Andrew. The Color-Blind Constitutioll. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press. 1992 . A history or errorts. non e yet successful. to make the Con stitution color-b lind .
Man sbridge. Jan e J. Wi,y We Lost the EHA . Chicago: Un ivers ity or
Chica go Press. 198fl. Ex plain s why t he Equa l Rights Amendment did not become part of th e Co nstitution.
Th ern strom. Stephan. and Abi ga il Thern strom. America in Black
WId WI,ile. New York: Sim on a nd Schu ster. 1997. Detail ed history and portrait of Arri ca n Ameri can s.
Wi lh oit. Fran cis M. Ti, e Politics of Ma ssive Hesis[(lllce. New York:
George BraY-i ll er. '19 73 . The methods- and ultim a te co ll apseof a ll -out south ern res istan ce to sch ool deseg rega tion .
Woodward. C. Vann. Ti, e St rallge Ca reer of Jilll Crow. New York:
Oxrord University Press. 195 7. BrieL lu cid account of th e evolulion of Jim Crow pra ctices in the South.

The latent causes offaction are thus
sown in the {Ire of man; and we see
hem everywhel1 brought into different
degrees of a ·vity, according to the
different circumstances of civil society.
FEDERALIST

No. 10

CHAPTER

7

Public Opinion

What Is Public Opinion?
How Polling Works •
Differ

How Opinions

Political Socialization: The Family
Religion • The Gender Gap •
Schooling and Information

Cleavages in Public Opinion
Social Class •
Region

Race and Ethnicity •

Political Ideology
Consistent Attitudes • What Do
Liberalism and Conservatism Mean? •
Various Categories • Analyzing
Consistency • Political Elites

Political Elites, Public Opinion,
and Public Policy

WHO GOVERNS?
1.

2.

How does public opinion in America
today vary by race, gender, and
other differences?
What is political ideology, and how
does it affect political behavior and
influence public policy?

TO WHAT ENDS?
1.

2.

What role did the Framers of the
Constitution think public opinion
should play in American democracy?
When, if ever, should public policies
mirror majority opinion?

n the Gettysburg Address Abraham Lincoln said that the United States
/ has a govern ment "of the people, by the people. a nd for the people." That
suggests that the government should do what the people want. If that is the
case, it is puzzling that:
o

o

o

o

o

The federal government has often had a large budget deficit, but the people want a balanced budget.
Courts have ordered that ch il dren be bused in order to balance the
schools racia lly. but the peopl e opposed busing.
The Equa l Rights Amendment to the Constitution was not rati fied, but
polls showed that most people supported it.
The House of Representatives voted to impeach President Bill Clinton
even though most Americans opposed this.
Most people believe that there shou ld be a limit on the number of terms
to which U.S. senators and members of the U.S. House of Representatives
ca n be elected , but Congress has not approved term limits.

Some people. refl ecting on the many ga ps between what the government
does and what the people want. may become cynica l and think our system
is democratic in name only. That would be a mistake. There are severa l very
good reaso ns why government po licy will often appear to be at odds with
public opinion.
First. the Framers of the Constitution did not try to create a government
that wou ld do from day to day "what the people want. " They created a government for the purpose of achieving certain substantive goals. The preamble to the Constitution lists six of these: "to form a more perfect Union.
establish Justice, ensure domestic Tranquility. prov ide for the co mmon
defense. promote the general Welfare. and secure the Blessings of Liberty."
One means of ach ieving these goa ls was popular rule. as provided for by
the right of the people to vote for members of the Hou se of Representatives
(and later for senators and presidentia l electors). But other means were
provid ed as well: representative government, federa lism, the separation of
powers. a Bill of Rights. and an ind ependent judiciary. These were a ll
intended to be checks on public opinion. In additi on the Framers kn ew that
in a nation as large and diverse as the Un ited States there would rarely be
any such thing as "pub lic opin ion"; rather there wou ld be many "pub lics"
(that is. fa ctions) holding many opinions. The Fra mers hoped that the
struggle among these many pub lics wou ld protect li berty (no one "pub lic"

155

156

Chapter 7

Public Opinion

American politics is intensely local, as when Rep. Loretta Sanchez
shakes hands with a voter in her California district.

would dominate) while at the sa me time permitting
the adoption of reasonable policies that commanded
the support of many factions.
Second, it is not as easy as one may suppose to
know what the public thinks. We are so inundated
these days with public opinion polls that we may
imagine that they tell us what the pub li c believes.
That may be true on a few rather simple, clear-cut.
and widely discussed issues. but it is not true with
respect to most matters on which the governm ent
must act. The best pollsters know the limits of their
methods. and the citizen should know them as well.
In this chapter we take a close look at what "pu blic opinion" is, how it is formed a nd how opinion s
differ. In later ch apters we examine the workings of
political parties. interest groups, and government
institutions and consider what impact they have on
whether public opinion affects government policy.

*

What Is Public Opinion?

Some years ago researchers at the University of
Cincinn ati asked twelve hundred loca l residents
whether they favored passage of the Monetary Control Bill . About 21 percent said th at they favored the
bill, 25 percent sa id that they opposed it, and the rest

public opinion How people think or feel
about particular things .

sai d that they hadn 't th ought much about the matter
or didn't know. But there was no such th in g as th e
Monetary Control Bill. The researchers made it up.
About 26 percent of the people questioned in a
nationa l survey a lso expressed opinions on the same
non ex iste nt piece of leg islation .) In many surveys.
wide majoriti es favor expanding most government
programs alld paying less in taxes. On some issues.
the majority in favor one month gives way to the
majority opposed the next. often with no obvious
basis for the shift.
How much confidence should we place in surveys
that presumably tell us "wh at the American people
think" about legislation and other issues, and how
should we assess "public opinion"?
Defined simply. public opinion refers to how people think or feel about particular things. For businesses. understanding public opinion- for exampl e.
knowing whether co nsu mers are likely to want a
new produ ct or be willing to pay more for an old
one- can spell the difference between profit and
loss. In the early twentieth century, corporations and
ma rketin g firms pioneered attempts to systematica lly measure public views. But po litica l scientists
were not far behind them.
The first major academi c studies of public opin ion
a nd votin g. publ ished in the 1940s. painted a distressing picture of American democracy. The studies
found tha t. whil e a sma ll group of citizens knew lots
about government an d had defini te ideas on ma ny
issues. the vast maj ority knew next to noth ing about
government and had only vague notions even on
much-publicized public policy matters that affected
them directly.2 In the ensuin g decades. however,
other studies painted a somewhat more reassuring
picture. These studies suggested that, whil e most citizens are poorly informed about government and
care little about most public policy issues, they are
nonetheless pretty good at using limited information
(or cues) to figure out what policies, parties, or candidates most nearly refl ect their values or favor their
interests, and then acting (or voting) accordingly. 3
The closer scholars have studied public opinion on
particular issues, the less uniformed. indifferent. or
fi ckle it has appeared to be. For exampl e. a 2001
study by poli tica l scientist Terry M. Moe analyzed
public opinion concerning whether the government
should provide parents with publicly fund ed grants.
or vouchers. that they can apply toward tuition at
private schools. He found that a lthough most peopl e

W hat Is Public Opinion?
are unfamil iar with the voucher issue, "they do a
much better job of formu lating their opinions th an
skeptics wou ld lead us to expecL,,4 When supplied
with bas ic information, average citizens adopt "their
positions for good substantive reasons, just as the
in formed do." s

How Polling Works
If properly conducted, a survey of pub lic opinion-

popularly ca lled a poll-can capture the opinions of
250 milli on citizens by interviewing as few as 1,500
of them, There are many keys to good polling: posing
comprehe nsib le questions (asking people about
things they have some basis for forming an opinion
about); wording questions fairly (not using "loaded"
or "emotional" words or indicating what the "right"
answer is); and oth ers.
But no poll, whatever it asks and however worded,
can prov ide us with a reasonab ly accurate measure
of how people think or feel unless the persons polled
are a random sample of the entire population,
meaning that any given voter or adult has an equa l
chance of being interviewed. Through a process
ca lled stratified or mu ltistage area samp li ng, the pollster makes a list of all the geographical un its in the
country- say a ll the counties- and groups (or
"stratifies") them by size of their population. The
po ll ster then selects at random units from each
group or stratum in proportion to its tota l population. With in each selected county smaller and smaller geographical units (down to particular blocks or
streets) are chosen, and then, within the smallest
unit, individuals are selected at random (by, for
example, choosing the occupant of every fifth
house). Repeat the process using equa lly randomized
methods, and the pollster might get slightly different
results. The difference between the results of two surveys or samples is called sampling error. For example, if one random sample shows that 70 percent of
all Americans approve of the way the president is
hand ling his job, and another random sample taken
at the same time shows that 65 percent do, the sampling error is 5 percent.
Even if properly conducted, po ll s are hardly infalli ble. Since 1952 every major po ll has in fact picked
the winner of the presidential election. Lil<ewise, exit
polls, interviews with random ly selected voters conducted at po ll ing places on election day in a representative sample of voting districts, have proven quite

accurate. But as a result of samp li ng error and for
other reasons, it is very hard for po llsters to pred ict
the winner in a close election.
For any population over 500,000, poll sters need
to make about 15,000 telephone ca lls to reach a
n umber of respondents (technica lly, the number
computes to 1,065) sufficient to ensure that the
opin ions of the sample differ only sli ghtly (by a 3 percent plus or minus marg in) from what the results
would have been had they interviewed the entire
population from which the sample was drawn. Th at
can be very expensive to do, and with more people
trying to avoid telemarketers (who sometimes pose
as pollsters) and using call-screening dev ices, pollsters are find ing it harder th an ever to get people to
answer their ca lls. 6 Low response rates can harm a
poll 's reliability.

How Opinions Differ
Nobody fu lly understands how pub lic opinion influences everything from who wins an election to what
gets pol iticians ' attention to whether given bills become law, but a few things are clear: some people
care more about certain issues than other people do
(opinion saliency) ; on some issues or choices, opin ions
are pretty steady, whi le on others they tend to be
more volatil e (opinion stabili ty); a nd, on some iss ues
government seems largely in sync with popular
views or majority sentiments, whi le on other issues it
seems significantly out of sync (opinion-policy congruence). For example, most Americans have an opinion
on U.S. involvement in Iraq, but some feel more
strongly about it than others do, and opinions have
changed in response to news of positive or negative
deve lopments. In mid-2004 , for example, much
news on the situation in Iraq was negative, and mass
public support for U.S. involvement fell.

poll A survey of public opinion .
random sample Method of selecting from a
population in which each person has an equal
probability of being selected .
sampling error The difference between the
results of random samples taken at the same
time .
exit polls Polls based on interviews conducted
on Election Day with randomly selected voters.

157

158

Chapter 7

Public Opinion
more or less consistent set of opinions as to the policies government ought to pursue. The government
attends more to the elite views than to popular views,
at least on many matters.

Political Socialization:
The Family

Children grow up learning, but not nlways following, their parents' political views.

Studies also tell us that people with certain characteristics in common sometimes hold certain political
beliefs in common. By no means do people with similar or even virtual ly identica l family histories. religious affiliations. formal educations, or job experiences
think or vote exactly the same wayan all or most
issues. But political socialization-the process by
which personal and other background traits influence
one's views about politics and government-matters.
It is behind the fact, to be discussed in the next section,
that children tend to share their parents' political orientations and party afnliations; and it helps to explain
why, as we shall see, opinions seem to vary in interesting ways asso-ciated with class, race, religion, gender,
and other characteristics.
Research has also made clear that mass and elite
opinion differ. By "elite" we do not mean people who
are "better" than others. Rather, as we discussed in
Chapter 1, elite is a term used by social scientists to
refer to people who have a disproportionate amount
of some valued resource-money, schooling, prestige, political power, or whatever. Not only do political elites know more about politics than the rest of us,
they think differently about it- they have different
views and beliefs. As we explain later in this chapter,
they are more likely than average citizens to hold a

political socialization

Process by which background traits influence one's political views.
elite People who have a disproportionate
amount of some valued resource .

The best-studied (though not necessarily the most
important) case of opinion formation is that of party
identification. The majority of young people identify
with their parents' political party. A study of high
school seniors showed that, of these young men and
women, almost all (91 percent) knew accurately the
presidential preference of their parents. the great
majority (71 percent) knew accurately their parents'
party identification, and most shared that identification (only 9 percent identified with the party opposite
to that of their parents). This process begins fairly
early in life: by the time they are in the fifth grade
(age eleven). over half of all schoolchildren identify
with one party or the other. and another fifth claim
to be independents. 7
Natura lly. as people grow older. they become more
independent or their parents in many ways. including
politically. but there nonetheless remains a great deal
or continuity between youthrul partisanship. learned
rrom one's parents. and adu lt partisanship. One study
of adults found that around 60 percent still had the
party identification-Democrat, Republican. or independent-of their parents. Of those who differed with
their parents, the overwhelming majority did so not
by identifying with the opposite party but by describing themselves as "independents."8
The ability or the family to inculcate a strong
sense of party identification has declined in recent
years. The proportion of citizens who say they consider themselves to be Democrats or Republicans
has become steadily smaller since the early 1950s.
Accompanying this decline in partisanship has been
a sharp rise in the proportion or citizens describing
themselves as independents.
Part or this change results rrom the ract that young
voters have always had a weaker sense or partisanship than older ones. But the youthrulness or the population cannot explain all the changes. for the decline
in partisansh ip has occurred at all age levels. Moreover, those who reached voting age in the 19 60s were
less apt than those who matured in the 19 50s to keep
the party identification or their parents. 9

Political Socialization: The Family
Figure 7.1

Generational Gaps on the Issues
Social Security

School Vouchers

Would you support or oppose a plan in which people
who chose could invest some of their Social Security
contribution in the stock market>

Do you favor or oppose providing parents with tax
money in the form of school vouchers to help pay for
their children to attend private or religious schools?

Oppose

18- 29 _
g>.,

Support

30- 49 _

Oppose

42%

Q)

OJ)

58%

<1;

67%

65+

Favor

18- 29 _

'--_ _ _ _ _..... 61 %

32%

50- 64 _

<1;

38%

30- 49 _
50- 64 _

54%

g>.,

50- 64 _
65+ _

Rights of women

55%
4 5%
37%
20%

36%

If you absolutely had to choose between each of the
following two values, which is more important to
you, personally - working for the righ ts of women or
preserving traditional family values

Shou ld not be
able to marry

18- 29 _
30- 49 _

_

49%
39%

Women's Rights

Gay Marriage

Should have
lega l right

58%

47 %
_
57%

65+ _

Do you think gays and lesbians should have the
legal right to get married, or do think they should
not be able to get married legally?

<1;

1 59

18- 29 _
g>.,
<1;

4 1%

30- 49 _

29%

50- 64 _

27 %

65+ _

Fami ly va lues

18%

Source: Survey by Washington Post/Hen ry J. Ka iser Family Foundatio n/Harvard Universi ty, August 2-Septem ber 1, 2002, as reported in El izabeth
Hamel et aI. , " Yo unger Voters," Public Perspective, May/June 2003, p. 11.

Though we stUl tend to acquire some measure of
partisanship from our parents, the mea nin g of that
identification is far from clear. There are, after all , liberal and conser vative Democrats, as well as liberal
and conser vative Republicans. So far the evidence
suggests that children are more independent of their
parents in policy preferences than in party identification. As Figure 7.1 summarizes, there are sizable
age-related differences in opinions on several issues.
In most families, the family dinner table is not a
seminar in political philosophy but a place where people discuss school, jobs, dates. and chores. In some
families, however, the dinner table is a poli tical classroom. Fairly clear political ideologies (a term we shall
define in a later section) seem to be communicated to
that small proportion of children raised in families
where politics is a dominant topiCof conversation and
political views are strongly held. Studies of the participants in various student radical movements in the
1960s suggested that college radicals were often the
sons and daughters of people who had themselves

been young radicals; some commentators dubbed
them the "red-diaper babies. " Presumably, deeply conservative people come disproportionately from families
that were also deeply conservative. This transfer of
political beliefs from one generation to the next does
not appear in large national studies, because such a
small proportion of the population is at either the far
left or the far right of the political spectrum.

Religion
One way in which the family forms and transmits
political beliefs is by its religious tradition. Religious
differences make for political differences, but the differences are generally more complicated than fir st
meets the eye. For example, opinions on school
prayer and other issues differ by religion. Table 7.1
shows that Catholics basically mir ror the general
pub lic in the extent to which they see school prayer
as an effective way to shape young people's values
and behav ior, while Evangelicals differ widely with
Jews and the nonreligious both on that question and

160

Chapter 7

Table 7.1

Public Opinion

Opinion on School Prayer, By Religion
General Public

Catholic

Evangelical

Jewish

Nonreligious

Agree Strongly % / Disagree Strongly %
School prayer is ...
an especially effective way
to improve the values and
behavior of today's young people
violates the Constitution

37/24
21/38

37/21
20/33

55/10
10/56

11/61
62/10

6/66
58/11

Agree %
Public schools should ...
have a moment of silence
say prayers that refer to God but
to no particular relig ion
say a prayer that refers to Jesus

53

57

53

30

36

20
6

22
4

26
12

9
2

7

Source: Adapted from For Goodness Sake: Why So Many Want Religion to Playa Greater Role in American Life (New York: the Public

Agenda Foundation, 2001), tables 5 and 7.

whether school prayer violates the Constitution. But
scroll down the table an d you see that no group,
regard less of religion, harbors majorities favoring
school prayers that refer to a particular religion.
Most studies have found that. whatever the faith
in question , religious influences on public opinion
are most pronounced with respect to social issues
a nd less ev ident on others. For exa mple. as Table 7.2
shows, only one in ten people rank religious belids as
the biggest influence in their thinking about Iraq.
while 40 percent deem religious beliefs the biggest
ini1uence on their thinking abo ut gay marriage.

The Gender Gap
Journalists often point out that women have "deserted" Republican candidates to favor Democratic ones.
In some cases that is true. But it would be more
correct to say that men have "deserted" Democratic
candidates for Republican ones. The gender gap is
the difference in political views between men and
women . Th at gap has existed for a long time. and it is
a prob lem for both political parties.
Men have become increas in gly Republican since
the mid-1960s. while the voting behavior of women

gender gap

Difference in political views
between men and women .

has remained unchanged. In 1952 men a nd women
identified with the Democratic party at about the
sa me level, around 58 or 59 percent. In 1996 women
still identified with the Democrats at about the same
level. wh il e men had abandoned the Democratic
party and identUled more with the Republicans.1 () In
the 2004 presidential election. women voted for
Democrat John Kerry by a margin of 51 percent to
48 percent. while men voted for Republican George
W. Bush by a margin of 55 percent to 44 percent.
The biggest reason for this gap seems to involve
attitudes about the size of government, gun control,
spending programs aimed at the poor, and gay rights.
Men h ave always been more conse rvative than
women in their views on these social issues, but by
the late 1960s and early 1970s men had changed
their party loyalty to match their policy preferences.
As Table 7.3 shows, men and women are similar in
their views on abortion but quite different in their
opinions about welfare, spendin g money to help the
homeless or to increase milita ry defense, and sexual
harassment in the workplace.
It would be a mistake, however, to suppose that
the gender gap is unchanging, matters the same in
all elections, or applies equ ally to all groups or subgroups. The gend er gap has been less ev ident in
midterm congress ional elections than it ha s bee n in
presidential elections. In the 2002 midterm House
electio ns the gap between how men a nd women vote

Political Socialization: The Family
lable 7.2

161

-

R eligious Influence on Public Opinion, By Issue

Biggest influence on
your thinking about ...
M edia
Personal experi ence
Educati on
Religious beliefs
Friends and f amily
Other
Don't know

Iraq %

Death Penalty %

Abortion %

Gay Marriage %

41
16
11
10
7
11
4

25
12
14

7
18
22

28

28

5
17
4

7
16
2

9
12
12
40
8
15
4

Source: Adapted from Different Faiths, Different Messages (Washington, D.C. . Pew Forum on Religion

and Public Life, March 2003), p. 3.

(four points. with women splitting their vote evenly
between Republican and Democratic candidates)
was the lowest since the 1994 midterm House elections (when it was eleven pOints) .12 Because there
are not as yet sufficient (or sufficiently reliabl e)
polling data. it is unclear whether the gap is as large
for Hispanics as it is for Afr ican Americans or whites.
Moreover. marriage matters as much as ge nder: in
2004 mar ried women supported Bush whi le unma rried ones supported Kerry.

find most young people to be in favor of school
vou chers (generally regarded as the conservative
position on that issue) but also in favor of legally
sanctioning gay marriage (generally regarded as the
liberal position on that iss ue). Belief in the idea of
individual choice-that parents shou ld be free to use
vo uchers to send their children to whatever school
they ch oose. that gays sh ould have the choice to get
married. a nd so forth- may well be present-day
co ll ege-age Ameri cans' core political opinion. 16

Schoofing and Information
America ns born from the mid-19 20s through the
mid-19 60s (the World Wa r II generation and their
baby-boomer children) went to college in record
numbers. Much resea rch has shown that attending
college had a big impact on their political attitudes.
usually makin g them more liberal. 13 This proved
especially true for th ose who attended the most
prestigious colleges. Related studies showed that
increased schooling led to significant increases in
voting and other political activity. 14 During the
1960s. many a ntiwar and other protest movements
drew their members lar gely from college students
who majored in liberal ar ts subj ects.1 5
These generalizations a pply less well to today's
college students. Although more research is needed.
there is evidence to suggest that whil e college students today are somewhat more conservative than
students were two deca des ago. their opinions are
complicated in ways that defy simple categorization .
For exa mple. ma ny surveys find tod ay's eighteen- to
twenty-I'o ur-yea r-olds to be quite favorably di sposed
toward the private sector even though they are not
conSistently for smaller government. Likewise. poll s

..
Issue
Federal spending for we lfare
programs sho uld be increa sed.
Abort ion sho uld be permitted by law.
Sexua l ha rassm ent is a very serious
problem in th e w orkplace.
This country w ould be better off if
we just stayed home and did not
co ncern o urse lves w it h probl ems
in other pa rts of t he wo rld .
Genera lly spea king, I t hin k of mysel f
as a Democrat.
Th e United States should increase
def ense spending .
The United Stat es sh ould increase
spending on solvi ng t he probl ems
of th e home less.
Ban all handgu ns except f or th e
po lice.

Men
8%

Women
14%

57
24

60

24

29

32

44

37

26

51

63

33

58

38

Source: ICPSR American Nat ional Election Survey, 1996. Pre- and Post-

Election Surveys.

162

Chapter 7

Public Opinion
But surveys also find that today's college students
seem mu ch less apt to read newspapers and newsmagazines tha n previous generations of college students were. 2 1 With the Internet, all-d ay cable news
ch annels, talk radio, a nd telev ision progra ms that
emphas ize political themes, researchers a re fa r from
being abl e to meas ure precisely how much political
information of given types college students or other
citizens get, from what sources, embodying which
biases, a nd with wh at (if any) shor t- or long-term
effects on opinions; we will return to this topic when
we discuss the media in Chapter 12.

A teen volunteer talks to boy s in a gym.

Since the 19 60s the number of college students in
the social sciences and humani ties has plummeted
relative to the number in business, preprofessional
sch oo ls. hotel man agement, n ursin g, justice administration , computer science, a nd other nonliberal
arts fields.] 7 Whatever the reaso n, over the past generation. increased schooling has not been associated
with increased political activity; in fact, by ma ny
meas ures, poli tica l pa rticipation among college students has declined. I S Ma ny contemporary college
students believe that volunteering is a more significant civic act than voting, and th at community service is more worthwhile than political engagement.I 9
Since the mid-1980s even elite colleges th at have few
conservative faculty members h ave been affected
by con cerns abou t "political correctness," a nd most
now h ave (often sma ll bu t vocal) conser vative studen t groups on campus. Also, after decades of
decline, many religious colleges and universities have
increased their enrollments while reinforcing their
traditional religious identities.
The politically liberalizing effects of college, at
least among older Americans, were probably attributable in par t to th e fact th at, compared to high
sch ool graduates, yesteryear's co ll ege ·graduates read
newspapers a nd newsmagazin es. Evidence collected
by political scientist John Zaller sh ows that the level
of political informati on one has is the best single predictor of bein g libera l on some kinds of issues, such
as civil liber ties and civil rights. 2o Information on
these matters, he suggests, is today produced by a
predominantly liberal elite.

~ Cleavages in Public Opinion
Th e way in which political opinions are formed helps
explain the cleavages that exist among these opinions and why these cleavages do not follow any single
political pr inciple but instead overlap and crosscut in
bewildering complexity. If, for example, the United
States lacked regional differences a nd was composed
almost entirely of white Protestants who had never
attended college, there wo uld still be pl enty of political conflict- the rich wo uld have different views
from the poo r; workers wo uld have different views
from fa rmers-but that co nflict wo uld be mu ch simpler to describe and expl ain. It might even lead to
politica l parties that were more clearly aligned with
co mpeting poli tical philosop hi es than those we now
have. In fact some democratic nations in the world
today do have a population very much like the one
we have asked you to imagine, a nd the United States
itself. during the first half of the nineteenth century,
was overwhelmingly white, Protestant, and without
much formal schooling.
Today. however, there are crosscutting cleavages
based on race, ethnicity, religion, region, and education, in addition to those created by income and
occupation . To the extent that politics is sensitive to
public opinion, it is sensitive to a variety of different
a nd eve n competing publics. Not all these publics
have influence proportionate to their numbers or
even to their numbers adju sted for the intensity of
their feelings. As will be described later, a filtering
process occurs that makes the opin ions of some
publics more influential tha n those of others.
Wha tever this state of a ffa irs may mean for
democracy, it creates a messy situ ation for politica l

Cleavages in Public Opinion

scientists. It would be so much easier if everyone's
opinion on political affairs reflected so me single feature of his or her life, such as income, occupation,
age, race, or sex. Of course, some writers have argued
that politica l opinion is a refl ection of one such feature, social class, usually defined in terms of income
or occupation, but that view, though containing
some truth, is beset with inconsistencies: poor blacks
and poor whites disagree sharply on many issu es
involving race; well-to-do Jews and well-to-do Protestants often have opposing opinions on social welfare
policy; and low-income elderly people are much
more worried about crime than are low-income
graduate students. Plumbers and professors may
have similar incomes, but they rarely h ave similar
views, and business people in New York City often
take a very different view of government than business people in Houston or Birmingham.
In some other democracies a single factor su ch as
class may explain more of the differences in political
attitud es than it does in the more socially heterogeneous United States. Most blu e-collar workers in
America think of themse lves as being "middlecl ass, " whereas most such workers in Britain and
France describe themselves as "working-cl ass." In
England the working class prefers the Labour party
by a margin of three to one, while in the United
States workers prefer the Democratic party by less
than two to one. 22

Social Class
Americans speak of "social class" with embarrassment. The n orm of equality tugs at our consciences,
urging us to judge people as individuals, not as parts
of some social group (such as "the lower class").
Social scientists speak of "class" with confusion .
They know it exists but quarrel constantly about
how to define it: by income? occupation? wealth?
schooling? prestige? personality?
Let's face up to the embarrassment and skip over
the confusion. Truck drivers and investment bankers
look different, ta lk differently, and vote differently.
There is nothing wrong with say in g that the first
gro up co nsists of "working-class" (or "blue-collar")
peop le and the latter of "upper-class" (o r "management") people. Moreover, though different definitions of class produce sli ghtly differen t groupings of
people, most definitions overlap to such an extent
that it does not matter too much which we use.

Union memiJers protest against President Bush outside the
2004 RepuiJlican National Convention in New York City.

However defined, public opinion and voting have
been less determined by class in the United States
than in Europe, and the extent of class cl eavage has
declined in the last few decades in both the United
States and Europe. In the 1950s V. O. Key, Jr., found
that differences in political opinion were closely associated with occupation. He noted that people holding
man agerial or professional jobs had distinctly more
conservative views on social welfare policy an d more
internationali st views on foreign policy than did
manual workers. 23
During the next decade this pattern changed
greatly. Opinion surveys done in the late 1960s
showed that business and professional people had
views quite similar to those of manual workers on
matters such as the poverty program, health insurance, American policy in Vietnam, and government
effo rts to create jobs. 24
Th e votin g patterns of different social classes
have also become somewh at more similar. Class voting has declined sharply since the late 1940s in the
Uni ted States, France, Great Britain , a nd West
Germany and declined moderately in Sweden.
Class differences remain, of course. Unskilled
workers are more likely than affluent white-collar
workers to be Democrats and to have liberal views on
economic poli cy. And when economic issues pinchfor exa mple, when farmers are hurting or steelworkers are being laid off- the importance of economic
interests in differentiating the opinions of various
groups ri ses sharply.

163

164

Chapter 7

Public Opinion

Favor expanding affirmative action programs'
Believe the justice system is racially biased against blacks'
Favor harsher treatment of criminals by the courts·
Favor more spending on national defense'
Favor national hea lth insurance by government'
Believe the U.S. Census Bureau should stop collecting
information on race and ethnicity'
Believe abortion should be legal in all cases'
Approve of black/white marriages'
Willing to vote for a black person for president·
Believe that too much is made of the differences
between blacks and whites and not enough of what
they have in common'

African American

White

53 %
72
78
13
39
48

22%
44
76
18
23
47

24

28
61
91
92

77
93
89

Sources. (a) Black/White Perspectives in the United States (Princeton, N.J.: The Gallup Organization, June
1997), 14, 16, 23, 24; (b) Gallup Polls, 1993 and 1994; (c) American Nationa l Elect ion Survey, 1996; (d) "The
Newsweek Poll," Newsweek (February 13, 1995): 65; (e) The Public Perspective (May 1995): 19; (f) The American Enterprise (November/December 1998): 92, reporting results of a March- April 1998 Public Agen da survey of white and black parents or guardians of children in kindergarten through twelfth grade.

StilL ma ny of the issues that now lead us to
choose which party to suppor t a nd that determine
whether we think of ourselves as libera ls or conservatives are noneconomic iss ues. In recent yea rs our
political posture has been sha ped by the positions we
take on race relations, abortion. school prayer, environmenta lism, and ter rorism. iss ues that do not
clearly a ffect the rich di fferently th a n the poor (or at
least do not affect them as differently as do the uni on
movement, the minimum wage, a nd unempl oyment). Moral, symbolic, a nd foreign policy matters
do not divide rich and poor in the same way as economic ones. Thus we have many well-off people who
think of themselves as liberals because they take
liberal position s on these noneconomic matters , and
many not-so-well-off people who think of themselves
as conser vatives because that is the position they
take on these issues.

Race and Ethnicity
Socia l class clearly has become a less clear-cut source
of political cleavage, but it is harder to kn ow what to
make of race and ethnicity. In some ways racia l differences a re of centra l importa nce. Afri can Americans a re overwhelming Democrats , whil e whites a re
much more likely to be Rep ublicans. African Ameri ca ns thought that O. J. Simpson was inn ocent of
killi ng his wife, but whi te America ns thought that he
was guilty. Blacks believe that the crimin a l justice

system is biased against them: whites disa gree.
Blacks favor a stronger affirm ative action program;
whi tes are opposed to it (see Tabl e 7.4).
But in other respects the opinions of whites and
bla cks are similar. Maj orities of both gro ups oppose
the use of racia l quotas . wa nt the courts to get
to ugher on crimina ls. oppose making abortion legal
in a ll cases. a nd nearly identica l percentages wish
that the Census Burea u would stop collecting data on
race and ethnicity. Huge majorities in both groups
think that too much is made of racial differences and
would be willin g to vote for an African American
presidential candidate.
There is some evidence that the differences between
white and black Americans may be narrowing. About
2 6 percent of African Americans ages twenty-six to
thirty-five (as opposed to only 3 percent of those ages
fifty-one to sixty-four) identify themselves as Republicans. 25 Likewise. African America n teenagers are only
half as likely as African American adults to think that
the socia l a nd economic differences between whites
and blacks are ma inly due to racial discrimination.26
Other hin ts of a decl ine in differences in black-white
opinions can be seen in Table 7.5, which shows that
majorities or pluralities in each group believe their
incomes will rise, and that race relations will improve.
over the next decade. A 2001 study examin ed gaps
in opinion between yo unger and older blacks with
regard to crimin al justice, education, the environ-

Cleavages in Public Opinion

•

•

!

••

Ten years from now, my family
income will be ...
Whites
Blacks
Ten years from now, race
relations will be . ..
Whites
Blacks

Better %

About the same %

Worse %

59
71

28
16

8
8

Better %

About the same %

Worse %

47

40

42

37

9
14

Source: Adapted from The A merica n Enterprise, April/May 2002, p. 61 .

ment. voting. and other issues. 2 7 Among other significant differences, black young adults (ages eighteen to
twenty-five) were far more likely than those ages fiftyone to sixty-four to say that it is okay not to vote if you
do not Wee any of the candidates and were far more
receptive than their elders to arguments in favor of
school vouchers. It remains to be seen, however,
whether this generation gap between younger and
older African Americans wi ll persist or have any
important political effects.
There is ev idence of an opinion gap between the
leaders of Afri can American organ izations and
Afri can Americans in general. with leaders more li kely than the rank and file to favor abortion, support
affirmative action, and doubt that blacks are making
progress. 28 This cleavage should not surprise us; as
we shall see, there is a similar cleavage between white
leaders and white citizens. But in 2004 some division
of opinion between the leaders of African American
organizations came to public view when President
George W. Bush, who had refused invitations to speak
before the National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People (NAACP), accepted an invitation to
speak before the National Urban League, another historic civil rights organization led by African Americans. The NAACP 's leaders had criticized Bush
strongly, while the National Urban League's leaders
had been more moderate in their criticism of him.
America is now home to over 30 million Latinos.
But the literature on Latino public opinion has been
ca ll ed "sma ll , disproportionately oriented toward
immigration, and relatively sil ent on the influence of
gender" and other possible intragroup opinion cleavages. 29 Likew ise, despite the country's growing Asian
popu lation. there is as yet a lso virtu a lly no literature
on Asian public opinion. However, an early survey of
ethnic groups in California, a state where fully one-

third of a ll recent immigrants to this country live.
gives us some hint of how Latinos and Asian Americans feel about political parties and issues. Latinos
identify themselves as Democrats, but much less so
than do blacks, and Asian Americans are even more
identified w ith the Republican party than Anglo
whites. On issues such as spend ing on the military
and welfare programs, prayer in public schools, and
the imposition of the death penalty for murder. Asian
American views are much more like those of Anglo
whites than those of either blacks or Hispanics. Latinos are somewhat more libera l than Anglos or Asian
Americans, but much less libera l than blacks, except
with respect to bilingual education programs. 30
These figures conceal important differences within
these ethnic groups. For example, Japanese Americans
are among the more conservative Asian Americans,
whereas Korean Americans (perhaps because they are
among the most recent immigrants) are more liberal.
Similarly, Latinos, the fastest-growing ethnic group in
the United States, are a diverse mix of Cuban Americans, Mexican Americans, Central Americans, and
Puerto Ricans, each with distinct political views. A
study of Latino voting in the 1988 presidential election found that Mexican Americans were the most
Democratic. Cuba n Americans were the most Republican, a nd Puerto Ricans were in between the other two
groups. 31 But no group of Latino voters has become
predictably partisan. In 1998, 78 percent of California's Latino (predominantly Mexican American) vote
went to Democrat Gray Davis in the governor's race,
but in Texas half of the Latino (also predominantly
Mexican American) vote went to reelect Republican
governor George W. Bush. 32
A 2003 survey furnished a reasonably comprehensive look at Hispanic political opinion. As Figure
7.2 shows, Hispanic majorities seem to favor bigger

165

Chapter 7

166

Figure 7.2

Public Opinion

Hispanic Opinions on U.S. Politics

Issues
Would you rather have a smaller
Hispanics
government providing fewer
services or a bigger government
Non-H ispan ics
providing more services?

Smaller
Bigger
No opini on
116% -------------------~------------------~~

I

52%

35%
--------------~~

Reduce deficit
Would you prefer reducing
the federal budget deficit
or cutting taxes?

I

Hispani cs
Non-Hispanics

Available with
stri cter lim its

Generally available
Which of these comes closest
to your view of abortion?
It should be ...

Hispani cs

I 20%

Non- Hispan ics

Do you favor or oppose
programs that make special
efforts to make up for past
discrimination and help
minorities get ahead?

No opin ion

44%

--=--=3:-:7:-:'Yc-o-=====:::===::;
:3;:;8;:;%:;::====~2~2:;:%;::

I

------------------------------~

Yes
Do you think homosexual
relations between consenting
adults should be legal?

Prohibited

33%

I

Hispanics

47%

Non-H ispanics

No opinion
No
~----------~-------4~
5%
~ I

38%

54%
Oppose

Favor

I

Hispanics
Non-H ispan ics

No opinion

I

76%

I

50%

Parties
Do you think the Republican
or Democratic Party...
... is more likely to ensure a
strong economy?

... is more likely to create
new jobs?

... is more likely to improve
education?

... cares more about the
needs and problems of
Hispanic Americans?

... comes closer to sharing
your moral values'

Republica n
Hispani cs

I

Democratic

Hispanics

Hispanics

20%

Non-H ispanics
Hispanics
Non-H ispanics

50%
32%

24%

Non-H ispan ics
Hispani cs

44%

38%

Non-Hispanics

I

47%

24%

Non-H ispanics

Both Neither

I- - - - - - - - - - I

48%
46%

34%
49%

21%
19%

50%

24%

46%
41%

Source: New York Times/CBS News Poll, as reported in New York Times, August 3,2003, p. 14.

No opin ion

I

Political Ideology
government. oppose making abortions generally
ava ilable, and think that the Democratic party cares
more about them and is better able to hand le economic and other issues. Whether this opinion snapshot will change over time remains to be seen.

1948, Kennedy in 1960, and Carter in 1976. And
even though Carter carried the South, he did not
win a majority of white southern votes.) Clinton
won in 1992 and 1996 without carrying the South,
but those were three-man races.

Region
It is widely believed that geographic region affects
political attitudes and in particular that southerners
and northerners disagree significan tly on many policy
questions. At one time white southerners were conspicuously less liberal than easterners. midwesterners,
or westerners on questions such as aid to minorities,
legalizing marijuana. school busing, and enlarging the
rights of those accused of crimes. Although more conservative on these issues, they held views on economic issues similar to those of whites in other regions of
the country. This helps to explain why the South was
for so long a part of the Democratic party coalition: on
national economic and social welfare policies, southerners expressed views not very different from those of
northerners. That coalition was always threatened.
however, by the divisiveness produced by issues of race
and liberty.
The southern lifestyle is in fact different from that
of other regions of the co untry. The South has, on
the whole. been more accommodating to business
enterprise and less so to organized labor than, for
exa mple. the Northeast; it gave greater support to the
third-party candidacy of George Wallace in 1968.
which was a protest against big government and the
growth of national political power as well as against
civil rights; and it was in the South that the greatest
opposition arose to income-redistribution pl ans such
as the Family Assistance Plan of 1969. Moreover,
there is some evid ence that white so utherners
became by the 1970s more conservative than they
had been in the 1950s, at least when compared to
white northerners.33 Fin ally. white so utherners
have become less attached to the Democratic party:
whereas over three-fourth s described themselves as
Democrats in 1952 , only a third did by 1996. 34
These changes in the South ca n have great significance. as we shall see in the next three chapters
when we cons ider how elections are fought. It is
enough for now to remember that. without the votes
of the southern states. no Democrat except Lyndon
] ohnson in 1964 would have been elected president
from 1940 through 1976. (Without the South,
Roosevelt would have lost in 1944, Trum an in

*-

Political Ideology

Up to now the words liberal and conservative have
been used here as if everyone ag reed on what they
meant and as if they accurately described general
sets of political beliefs held by large segments of the
population. Neither of these assumptions is correct.
Like many useful words- love, justice, happinessthey are as vague as they are indispensable.
When we refer to people as liberals, conservatives.
socialists, or radicals, we are implying that they have
a patterned set of beliefs about how government and
other important institutions in fact operate and how
they ought to operate, and in particular about what
kinds of policies government ought to pursue. They
are said to display to some degree a political ideology- that is, a more or less consistent set of beliefs
about what policies government ought to pursue.
Political scientists measure the extent to which people have a political ideology in two ways: Ilrst, by
seeing how frequently people use broad political categories (such as "liberal," "conservative," "radical")
to describe their own views or to justify their preferences for various candidates and policies, and second, by seeing to what extent the policy preferences
of a citizen are consistent over time or are based at
anyone time on consistent principles.
This second method involves a simple mathematical procedure: measuring how accurately one can
predict a person's view on a subj ect at one time
based on his or her view on that subject at an earlier
time, or measuring how accurately one can predict a
perso n's view on one issue based on his or her view
on a different issue. The hi gher the accuracy of such
predictions (or correlations), the more we say a
perso n's political opinions display "constraint," or

A more or less consistent set
of beliefs a bout what pol icies govern ment
ou ght t o purs ue .

political ideology

167

168

Chapter 7

Figure 7.3

Public Opinion

Consistent Attitudes

Ideological Self-Identification

QUESTION
How would you describe your views on most political matters? Generally,
do you think of yourself as a liberal, moderate, or conservative?

-

Liberal

-

Moderate

-

Conservat ive

50

40

gpo
co

C
Q)
u

~

20

10

1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 19901992 1994 1996 19982000

Source: The American Enterprise (March/Ap ril 1993): 84, Robert S Erikson

and Kent L. Ted in, American Public Opinion (New York: Longman , 2001),
101, citing surveys by CBS/New York Times.

id eology. Despite annual fluctu ations, ideo logica l
self-identillcation surveys typically find that moderates are the largest group among American voters,
co nservatives the second largest, a nd libera ls the
smallest (see Figure 7.3 ). This pattern held throughout the 1990s. In 1998 one-fifth of voters described
themselves as liberal, one-third described themselves
as conservative. and a plurality ca ll ed themsel ves
moderate. 35
Except when as ked by pollsters, most Americans
do not actually employ the words liberal or conservative in explaining or justifying their preferences for
cand id ates or policies, and not many more tha n h alf
can give plausible definitions of these terms. Furthermore, there are relative ly low correlations
among th e answers to similar questions asked by
pollsters at different times and to comparable questions asked at the same time. From this. many scholars h ave co nclud ed th at th e great majority of
Americans do not think about politics in an id eologicalor even in a very co herent manner and that they
make little use of su ch concepts, so dear to political
commentators and professors alike. as "libera l" and
"conservative." 36

This does not settle the question entirely, however.
Critics of the view that Americans are nonideological
have argued that peop le can have genera l, and
strongly felt, political predispositions even though
they are not able to use terms such as liberal correctly.
Moreover, public opinion polls must of necessity ask
rather simpl e questions, a nd the apparent "inconsistency" in the answers people give at different times
may mean only that the nature of the problem and
the wording of the question have cha nged in ways
not obvious to the peopl e a nalyzing the surveys.37
People can have an ideology without using the
words liberal or conservative and without having beliefs
that line up neatly along the conventional liberalversus-conservative dimension. We saw in Chapter 4
that most Americans share a distinctive political culture- a belief in freedom, equality (of poli ti ca l condition and economic opportunity), a nd civic duty. They
also attach a great deal of importa nce to 'i\ mericanism." Though these words may be vague, they are not
trivial-at some level they are an ideo logy.
Scholars reg ularly discover that people have what
some would consider "inconsistent" opinions. For
exa mple, a voter may want the government to spend
more on education and the environment and at the
sa me time favor a bigger military bud get a nd a tough
posture toward unfriendly nations. These views are
"inconsistent" only in the sense that they violate a
poli tical rule of thumb. common in the media a nd
in national poli cy debates, that expects people who
favor a bigger welfare state to favor a sma ll er military
estab li shment as well. That is the conventional "liberal" view. Similarly, the rule of thumb in the medi a
is that people who support a strong milita ry posture
are also going to favor prayer in the schools a nd
oppose abor tion on demand. That is the conventional "conservative" position. But of course many citizens viol ate these rules of thumb , pi cking and
choosin g their positions without regard to th e conventional definition s of liberalism and conservatism.

What Do Liberalism and
Conservatism Mean?
Just because most people are not co nsistent liberals
or consistent conservatives does n ot prove that these
terms are mea ningless. As we sh all see, they are very
meaningful for political elites. And they even have

Political Ideology
meaning for ordinary citizens. but this meaning is a
complicated one that requires careful analysis.
The definition of these words has changed since
they first came into use in the early nineteenth century. At that time a liberal was a person who favored
personal and economic liberty- that is. freedom from
the controls and powers of the state. An economic
liberal. for example. supported the free market and
opposed government regulation of trade. A conservative was originally a person who opposed the excesses
of the French Revolution and its emphasis on personal freedom and favored instead a restoration of the
power of the state. the church. and the aristocracy.
Beginning around the time of Franklin Roosevelt
and the New Deal. the meaning of these terms began
to change. Roosevelt used the term liberal to refer to
his political program- one that called for an active
national government that would intervene in the
economy. create social welfare programs. and help
certain groups (such as organized labor) acquire
greater bargaining power. In time the opponents of
an activist national government began using the term
conservative to describe themselves. (Barry Goldwater.
in 1964, was the first major u.s. politician to proclaim himself a conservative.) In general a conservative favored a free market rather than a regulated one.
states' rights over national supremacy, and greater
reliance on individual choice in economic affairs.
Though the meaning of these terms changed . it
did not in the process become more precise. Two persons may describe themselves as liberals even though
the first favors both the welfare state and a strong
national defense and the second favors the welfare
state but wants a sharp reduction in military spending. Similarly. one conservative may favor enforcement of laws against drug abuse, and another may
believe that the government should let people decide
for themselves what drugs to take. Once liberals
favored laws guaranteeing equality of opportunity
among the races; now some liberals favor "affirmative action" plans involving racial quotas or goals.
Once conservatives opposed American intervention
abroad; today many conservatives believe the United
States should play an active role in foreign affairs.
In view of this confusion one is tempted to throw
up one's hands in disgust and consign words IU<e liberal and conservative to the garbage can. While understandable. such a reaction would be a mistake.
because in spite of their ambiguities, these words
remain in general use, convey some significant

meaning. and pOint to real differences between, for
example, the liberal and conservative wings of the
Democratic and Republican parties. Our task is to
clarify these differences by showing the particular
meanings these words have. One way to do this is by
considering how self-described liberals and conservatives differ in their opinions on prominent issues,
such as those listed in Table 7.6.

Various Categories
We can imagine certain broad categories of opinion to
which different people subscribe. These categories are
found by analyzing the answers people give to dozens
of questions about political issues. Different analysts
come up with slightly different categories. but on the
whole there is a substantial amount of agreement.
Three categories in particular have proved useful.
The ftrst category involves questions about government policy with regard to the economy. We will
describe as liberal those persons who favor government
efforts to ensure that everyone has a job. to spend more
money on medical and educational programs, and to
increase rates of taxation for well-to-do persons.
The second involves questions about civil rights
and race relations. We will describe as liberal those
who favor strong federal action to desegregate
schools, to increase hiring opportunities for minorities. to provide compensatory programs for minorities, and to enforce civil rights laws strictly.
The third involves questions about public and
political conduct. We will describe as liberal those
who are tolerant of protest demonstrations. who
favor legalizing marijuana and in other ways wish
to "decriminalize" so-called victimless crimes. who
emphasize protecting the rights of the accused over
punishing criminals, and who see the solution to
crime in eliminating its causes rather than in getting
tough with offenders.

Analyzing Consistency
Now it is obvious that people can take a liberal position on one of these issues and a conservative position on another without feeling in the slightest
degree "inconsistent. " Several studies, such as those
by Seymour Martin Lipset and Earl Raab and by
Herbert McClosky and John Zaller, show that this is
exactly what most people do. 38
This fact does not mean that people are unideological but that we need more than two labels to
describe their ideology. If we considered all possible

169

170

Chapter 7

Public Opinion

Belief
The government should provide "more services even if it
means an increase in spending."
The government should guarantee "that every person
has a job and a good standard of living ."
Favor "government insurance plan which would cover all
medical and hospital expenses for everyone."
The government "should make every effort to improve
the social and economic position of blacks."
The U.S. "should spend less on defense."
"Aid to [Russia] should be increased ."
"Women should have an equal role in running business,
industry, and government."
The United States should always permit abortion "as a
matter of personal choice."
"Homosexuals should be allowed to serve in U.S . Armed
Forces."
"Oppose death penalty for persons convicted of murder."

Support Among
Self-Declared Liberals

Support Among
Self-Declared Conservatives

73 %

32%

55

21

82

27

55

18

85
36
96

65
32
81

72

36

70

45

35

15

Source: Robert 5 Erikson and Kent L. ledin, American Public Opinion, 5th ed . (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1995), 69. Copyright © 1995 by
Addison-Wesley-Longman . Reprinted with permission .

co mbinations of the three sets of views described
above. we would have nine ca tegories of opinion; if
peopl e always stuck with whichever category they
were in. we would need nine different ideo logi cal
labels to describe those people.
To invent those labels and describe the people who
have those views would take countless pages and bore
readers to tears. To avoid all that pain and suffering.
let's use just two sets of views- those on economic
policy and those on personal conduct-and describe
the kind s of people who have each of the four combinations (liberal or conservative on each set). 39
1. Pure liberals These people are liberal on both
eco nomi c policy and perso nal conduct. They
wa nt the government to reduce economi c
in equality. regu late business. tax the rich heavily.
cure the (presumably) economic ca uses of crime.
allow abortions. protect the rights of the accused.
and guarantee the broadest possible freedoms of
speech and press.
Traits: Pure liberals are more likely than the average citizen to be young. co ll ege-educated. a nd
nonreligious.
2. Pure conservatives These people are conservative on both economic an d conduct issues. They

want the government to cut back on the welfare
state. allow the market to all ocate goods and services. keep taxes low. lock up criminals. and curb
form s of conduct they regard as antisocial.
Traits: Pure conservatives a re more likely than
the average citizen to be old er. to have higher
incomes. to be white. and to live in the Midwest.
3. Libertarians These people are conservative on
economic matters and libera l on social ones. The
common theme is that they want a small. wealc
government- one that has little contTol over either
the economy or the personal lives of citizens.
Traits: Libertarians are more likely than the average citizen to be yo ung , college-educated, and
white. to have higher incomes and no religion,
a nd to live in the West.
4. Populists These peop le are liberal on economic
matters and conservative on social ones. They
wa nt a government that will reduce economic
in eq uality and co ntrol business, but they also
wan t it to regulate perso nal conduct. lock up
crimin als, and permit school prayer.
Traits: Popu lists are more likely than the average
citizen to be older, poorly educated, low-income,
religious. and female and to live in the South or
Midwest.

171

Political Ideo logy
Obviously tills classification is an oversimplification.
There are many exceptions, and the number of people
in each category changes [rom time to time. Moreover,
this categorization leaves out about one-seventh of the
population- their views do not Ilt any of these categories. Nonetheless, it is a useful way to explain how
complex are the political ideologies in this country and
why terms such as liberal and conservative, in their
"pure" form, describe the views of relatively few people.

Political Elites
There is one group that can be classified as liberals and
conservatives in a pure sense, and it is made up of people who are in the political elite. Every society has an
elite, because in every society government ofllcials will
have more power than ordinary fo lk, some persons
will make more money than others, and some people
will be more popular than others. In the former Soviet
Union they even had an ofllcial name for the political
elite-the nomenklatura. But, in America, we often
refer to political elites more casually as "activists"people who hold of!ke, run for offlce, work in campaigns or on newspapers, lead interest groups and
socia l movements, and speal< out on public issues.
Being an activist is not an all-or-nothing proposition:
people display differing degrees of activism, from
fu ll-time pol iticians to persons who occasionally get
invo lved in a campaign (see Chapter 8). But the more
a person is an activist, the more likely it is that he or
she will display ideological consistency on the conventionalliberal-conservative spectrum.
The reasons for this greater consistency seem to
be information and peers. First, information: in genera l, the better inform ed people are about po litics and
the more interest they take in politics, the more likely they are to have consistently liberal or conservative views. 40 This higher level of information and
interest may lead them to find relationships among
issues that others don't see and to learn from the
med ia and elsewhere what are the "right" things to
believe. Th is does not mean that there are no differences with in liberal elites (or within conservative
ones), on ly that the differences occur within a liberal
(or conservative) consensus that is more we ll
defined, more consistent, and more important to
those who share it than would be the case among
ordinary citizens.
Seco nd , peers: politics does not make strange bedfellows. On the contrary, pol itics is a process of likes
attracting likes. The more active you are in politics,

. ..

... ...
Preferences

Issue

Democrats

Should allow people to invest
part of Social Security t axes
on their own.
For murder, pena lty
should be death .
Unfavorable opinion of National
Rifle Associat ion.
Abo rtio n should be available
to those who want it.
Must protect environment
even if jobs are lost .
Parents should get tax-paid vouchers
to help pay for children
attending private schools.

Republicans

44 %

61 %

46

55

44

20

48

25

72

57

41

53

Source: Adapted from New York Times/CB S News poll, New York Times,
(August 14, 2000), A 17. Copyright © 2000 The New York Times.

the more you will associate with people who agree
with you on some issues; and the more time you
spend w ith those people, the more your other views
will shift to match theirs.
The greater ideological conSistency of political
elites can be seen in Congress. As we shall note in
Chapter 13, Democratic members of Congress tend
to be consistently liberal, and Republican members
of Congress tend to be consistently conservativeJar more conSistently than Democratic voters and
Republican voters. By the same token we shall see in
Chapter 9 that the delegates to pres idential nominatin g conventions are far more ideo log ica l (liberal in
the Democratic convention, conservative in the
Repub lican one) than is true of voters who identify
with the Democratic or Republican party.
Still, on a large number of issues, the policy preferences of average Republican and Democratic voters do
differ significantly from one another (see Table 7.7).
Some political scientists argue that Republican and
Democratic leaders in Congress are more polarized
because voters are more polarized. For example, in

political elites

Persons with a disproportion ate share of political power.

172

Chapter 7

Public Opinion

Alter Saddall1 Hussein's governlllent was overthrown hy Alllerican and other troops, his statue
was pulled down in Baghdad.

1970 only 30 percent of voters who opposed abortion
under all circumstances identifi ed themselves as
Republicans: by 1998, 71 percent did so.41 Since the
1980s partisan voting has become more common.
while the share of those who are independent has
shrunk. 42
Other political scientists, however. analyze the
available polling and election data differently. They
find that ideological changes among voters have
been "marginal at best, " while public opinion among
Democrats voting in districts represented by Democrats and among Republica ns voting in districts represented by Republicans has been remarkably
stable. 43 Which side is right? We have no data that
will allow us to compare in each district what voters
think and how their representatives behave. To
amass such data would require polls of perhaps five
hundred voters in each congressional district taken
several years apart. Nobody thinks it is worth spending millions of dollars to interv iew over ten thousand

voters at different times just to answer this one academic puzzle.

Political Elites, Public
Opinion, and Public Policy
Though the elites and the public see politics in very
different ways, and though there are often intense
antagonisms between the two groups, the elites influence public opinion in at least two important ways.
First. elites, especially those in or having access to
the media (see Chapter 12). raise and frame political
issues. At one time environmentalism was not on the
political agenda: at a later time not only was it on the
agenda. it was up near the top of government concerns. At some times the government had little interest in what it should do in South Africa or Central
America: at other times the government was preoccupied with these matters. Though world events help

U.S. Senate to Debate
New Curbs on Legal
Immigration

MEMORANDUM
To: Senator Rebecca Kowal
From: Lia Fantuzzo, legislative intern
Subject: Reducing legal immigration

May 22
WASHINGTON
Legal iIn · .
mIgratIon to th
.
reached record h· h
e UnI ted States I
9
Ig S From 1991
las
million people ~ r b
to 2000 more than
entered the count:y d a out 300,000 more than
twentieth century
unng the first decade of th
S
' came to Am .
e
enca .. Nex t week the
enate begins debate on
slow or stop the flow of I several .bIlls that would
egal ilnmigrants ...

Your constituents are evenly divided over restrictions. Having declared
yourself "neutral pending further study and debate," you are nonetheless being
urged by valued colleagues on both sides of the issue and by the press to take a
position on cutting legal immigration .
Arguments for:
1. Since Congress liberalized U.s. immigration laws in 1965, nearly 25 million legal
immigrants have settled in America, and the percentage of foreign-born u.s.
residents has risen to 10 percent. At this rate, by 2050 the total u .s. population will
rise by about 125 million, to near ly 400 million . Two-thi rds of the increase will be
due to legal immigration.
2. For every ten legal immigrants, about three undocumented aliens enter the country.
Together they take jobs away from native-born Americans .
3. Most immigrants settle in one of four states (California, Florida, New York, and
Texa s), placing an undue burden on those states to pay for services such as health
care and welfare for immigrants.
Arguments against:
1. From 1860 to 1930 over 10 percent of u.S. residents were foreign born. Without
immigration the U.s. population will reach 310 million by 2035 and then decline.
Immigrants not only consume public services but also pay taxes and provide a
younger, more vital labor pool.
2. All told only about 5 million noncitizens are living unlawfully in the United States.
Legal immigrants include people with advanced degrees and highly marketable
skills. Low-skilled immigrants often take menial jobs that nobody else wants.
3. Immigrants have always tended to settle in a few areas. In the first half of the
twentieth century, most settled in a half dozen big cities . Today the federal
government provides funds to the states to pay for at least some of the costs of
social services for residents, including immigrants.
Your decision:
Favor curbs _ __
Oppose curbs _ __

174

Chapter 7

Public Opinion

shape the political agenda. so also do political elites.
A path-breaking study by John Zaller shows in fact
that elite views shape mass views by influencing both
what issues capture the public's attention and how
those issues are debated and decided.44 Contrary
to the myth of the pandering politician. recent evidence suggests that what scholars of the subject call
opinion-policy congruence (essentially the rate at
which governments adopt crime. health. trade. and
other policies supported by majorities in polls) has
been declining. not rising. since 1980. a trend that
may reflect greater elite influence over how policy
options are presented to the public. 45
Second. elites state the norms by which issues
should be settled. (A norm is a standard of right or
proper conduct.) By doing this they help determine
the range of acceptable and unacceptable policy
options. For example. elites have for a long time
emphasized that racism is wrong. Of late they have
emphasized that sexism is wrong. Over a long period
the steady repetition of views condemning racism
and sexism will at least intimidate. and perhaps convince. those of us who are racist and sexist.
A recent example of this process has been the
public discussion of AIDS and its relationship to
homosexuality. The initial public reaction to AIDS
was one of fear and loathing. But efforts to quarantine people infected with AIDS were met with firm
resistance from the medical community and from

*"P

other policy elites. The elites even managed to persuade some legislatures to bar insurance companies
from testing insurance applicants for the disease.
There are limits to how much influence elites can
have on the public. For instance. elites do not define economic problems- people can see for themselves that
there is or is not unemployment. that there is or is not
raging inflation. that there are or are not high interest
rates. Elite opinion may shape the policies. but it does
not define the problem. Similarly. elite opinion has little
influence on whether we think there is a crime or drug
problem; it is. after all. our purses being snatched. cars
being stolen. and children being drugged. On the other
hand. elite opinion does defme the problem as well as
the policy options with respect to most aspects of foreign affairs; the public has little firsthand experience
with which to judge what is going on in Iraq.
Because elites affect how we see some issues and
determine how other issues get resolved. it is important to study the differences between elite and public opinion. But it is wrong to suppose that there is
one eli te. unified in its interests and opinions. Just as
there are many publics. and hence many public opinions. there are many elites. and hence many different
elite opinions. Whether there is enough variety of
opinion and influence among elites to justify calling
our politics "pluralist" is one of the central issues
confronting any student of government.

SUMMARY

ublic opinion" is a slippery notion. partly
because there are many publics. with many
different opinions. and partly because opinion on all
but relatively simple matters tends to be uninformed.
unstable. and sensitive to different ways of asking
poll questions. Polling is a difficult and expensive art.
not an exact science.
Political attitudes are shaped by family. schooling. and other experiences. Opinions vary in America
according to class. gender. and other characteristics.
Americans are also divided by their political ideologies
but not along a single liberal-conservative dimension.

norm

A standard of right or proper conduct.

There are several kinds of issues on which people may
take "liberal" or "conservative" positions. and they
often do not take the same position on all issues. Just
using two kinds of issues--economic and social- it is
possible to define four kinds of ideologies: pure liberal.
pure conservative. libertarian. and populist.
Political elites are much more likely to display a
consistently liberal or consistently conservative ideology. Elites are important because they have a disproportionate influence on public policy and even an
influence on mass opinion (through the dissemination
of information and the evocation of political norms).

Summary
RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?

1. How does public opinion in America today vary
1m race, gender. and other differences?
There are cleavages in American public opinion. but
they change over time. and it is hard to genera lize
meaningfully about how they affect politics and government. For example, on some issues, the opin ions
of whites and blacks are similar or narrowing, but on
other issues. wide opinion gaps rema in between
whites and blacks. Surprisingly, li ttle major research
exists on the opinions and partisan preferences of the
country's over 30 million Latinos. People who attend
worship services regularly are more conservative
and far more likely to vote Republican in presidential
elections than people who attend worship services
rarely if ever. Women are far more sympathetic to
liberal causes and Democratic candidates than men,
but these so-called gender gaps in opinion and voting
behavior are more pronounced in some elections
than in others.

2. What is political ideology, and how does it aflect
politicalbei1avior and influCl1ce public policU?
Political ideology is a more or less consistent set of
beliefs about the policies government ought to pursue.
Political scientists measure the extent to which people
have a political ideology by seeing how frequently people use broad political categories (such as "liberal" and
"conservative") to describe their own views or to justify their preferences for candidates and policies. They
also measure it by seeing to what extent the policy
preferences of a citizen are consistent over time or are
based at anyone time on consistent principles. Many
scholars believe that Americans are becoming more
ideological. On many issues, for example, the policy
preferences of average Republican and Democratic
voters now differ significantly from one another. There
is clear evidence that political elites are more ideological today than they were just a generation or two ago.
The government attends more to the elite views than
to popular views, at least on many matters.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. What role did the Framers of the Constitution
think public opinion should play in American
democracy?
Basica lly, a rather limited role. Turn to the Appendix
and read Federalist No. 10 by James Madison. In it,
Madison makes plain his view that the public interest
is not always. or even often, the same as what most
people demand from the government. Instead members of Congress are to be "proper guardians of the
public weal. " representatives who serve "the permanent and aggregate interests" of the country. He holds
that "the regulation of these various and interfering
interests" is the "principal task" of representatives.
2. When, if ever. should pulJIic policies mirror
majority opinion?
For most of us. the answer depends on the issue in
question. (Which, if any. of the gaps between majority opinion and public policy mentioned on the first

page of this chapter would you wish to see closed?)
When it comes to civil rights and civil liberties (see
Chapters 5 and 6). few of us wou ld be wi llin g, strictly speaking. to trust our freedoms to a popular vote.
On the other hand, few of us wou ld consider our system truly democratic if government only rarely did
pretty much what most people wanted. The Framers
of the Constitution offer one prinCipled answer. They
believed temporary or transient popular majorities
should carry little weight with representatives, but
persistent popular majorities-for example, ones
that persist over the staggered terms of House and
Senate and over more than a single presidential
term- should be heard and in many, though not in
all, cases h eeded.

175

176

Chapter 7

Public Opinion

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

Roper Center for Public Opinion Research:
www.lib.uconn.edu/RoperCenter
CBS ews po ll : cbsnews.cbs.com
Gallu p op inion poll: www.gallup.com
Los Allgeles Tim es poll :
www.latimes.com/news/ c ustom/ ti mespoll

The Pew Research Center for the People & the Press:
www.people-press.org
Zogby Interna tional: www.zogby.com

SUGGESTED READINGS
Converse. Philip E. "T he Na ture of Be li e f Systems in Ma ss
Publics." In Ideology alld Discolltell t. edited by David Apter.
Gle ncoe. III. : Free Press. 1964. The classic discussion of in co nsiste ncies in public opinion.
Erikson. Robert S.. and Kent L. Ted in. AlI1eriCIIII Public Opinioll . 5tb
ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 1995. An excellent summary of
how opinio n is measured. what it shows. and how it affects
politics.
Jennin gs. M. Kent. a nd Richard G. iemi. GeliemUolIS (lnd Politics.
Princeton. N.J. : Prin ceto n University Press. 198 1 . A study of
persistence a nd cha nge in th e po li tica l views of you ng adu lts
and thei r parents.
- - -.Tlle Political Cllamcter oj Adolescellce: Tile IlIj)l/elice oj hl/llilies alld Scllools. Princeton. N.J. : Princeton University Press.
] 974. A study of political attitudes among high school students.
Key. V. 0 .. Jr. Til e Respollsible Eiectomte. Ca mbrid ge: Harvard University Press. ] 966. An argume nt. with eviden ce. that Ameri can vo ters are not fools.
Lipset. Sey mour Martin. Politica l Mall: Ti, e Social Bases of Politics.
Ga rden City. .Y. : Doubleday. 1959 . An ex ploration of the
re la ti onship between society. opini o n. and democ ra cy in
Ameri ca an d a broad.

Moe. Terry M. Scllools. \lol/cllers. alld tile Alilericall PI/We. Washington. D.C.: Brookings In stituti on Press. 2001. A masterfu l study
of h ow public opinion matters to edu ca tion policy. suggesting
that most people. with only slight information. form reasonable views.
Nie. Norman H.. Sidney Verba. and John R. Petroeik. Tile Changing
Alllerical/ \loter. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 1976.
Traces shifts in American voter attitudes sin ce 1960.
Weissberg. Robert. Pol/illg. Policy. (l lId P/lblic Opillioll. New York:
Pal grave Ma cmillan. 2002. !\ critiqu e of what we think we
know from opinion pollin g. sh ow in g the ma ny ways in which
po ll s can give us mislead in g answers.
Za ll er. John . Til e Nat llre alld Origills of Mass Opillioll. Ca mbridge.
England: Ca mbridge Uni versity Press. 1992. A path-breaking
study of how the public fo rm s a n opini on. illu strating th e ways
in whic h elite views help s ha pe m ass views.

CHAPTER

Political Participation

A Closer Look at Nonvoting

The Rise of the American Electorate
From State to Federal Control •
Voter Turnout

Who Participates in Politics?
Forms of Participation • The Causes
of Participation • The Meaning of
Participation Rates

8

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.
2.

1.

Who votes, who doesn't?
Why do some people participate in
politics at higher rates than others?

How did the Framers of the Constitution think average citizens should
participate in America's representa tive democracy?
2. Should today's college-age citizens
participate more in politics?

A

mericans are often embarrassed by their low rate of participation in
national elections. Data such as those shown in Table 8.1 are frequently used to make the pOint: whereas well over 80 percen t of the people
vote in many European election s. only about hair or the people vote in
American presidential elections (and a much smaller percentage vote in
congressional contests). Many observers blame this low turnout on voter
apathy and urge the government and private groups to mou nt campaigns
to get out the vote.
There are on ly three things wrong with this view. First. it is a misleading
description of the prob lem: second. it is an incorrect explanation or the
prob lem; and third. it proposes a remedy that probab ly won't work.

A Closer Look at Nonvoting
First. let's look at how best to describe the problem. The conventiona l data
on voter turnout here and abroad are mis leading because they compute
participation rates by two different measures. In this country only twothirds of the voting-age population is registered to vote. To understand what
this means, look at Tab le 8.1. In column A are several countries ranked in
terms or the percentage or the voting-age populati on that voted in
1996- 2001 national elections. As you can see, the United States. where
47.2 percent voted. ranked near the bottom; only Switzerland was lower.
Now look at co lumn B, where the same countries are ranked in terms of the
percentage of registered voter s who participated in these national elections. The United States. where 63.4 percent of registered voters turned out
at the polls. is now fifth rrom the bottom. 1
Second. let's consider a better explanation for the problem. Apathy on
election day is clearly not the source of the problem . Of those who are registered . the overwhelming majority vote. The real source of the participation problem in the Un ited States is that a relatively low percentage of the
adult population is registered to vote.
Third. let's look at how to cure the problem. Mounting a get-out-the-vote
drive probably wou ldn 't make much difference. In a study pub lished in
2004. politica l scientists Donald P Green and Alan S. Gerber ana lyzed evidence on a wide variety of voter mobilization strategies: door-to-door canvassing. leafl ets. direct mail. phone banks. and electronic mail. 2 In most
cases. the effects on voter turnout were small or nil. Neither remind ing

178

179

A Closer Look at No nvoting
voters that election day is near nor supplying them
with information seems to make much difference. But
in low-turnout elections (for exa mple, midterm congressiona l elections), people who norma lly vote anyway "are especia lly receptive to get-out-the-vote
appeals, particularly when contacted fa ce-to-face." 3
Still , it's not frequent voters, but nonregistered
voters, who must be mobilized if turnout rates are to
rise significantly. What might ma ke a difference is a
plan that would get more people to register to vote.
But doing that does not necessa rily involve overcoming the "apathy" of unregistered voters. Some people
may not register because they don't care about politics or their duty as citizens. But there are other
explanations for being unregistered. In this country
the entire burden of registering to vote falls on the
individual voters. They must learn how and when
and where to register; they must take the time and
troub le to go someplace and fill out a registration
form; and th ey must reregister in a new county or
state if they happen to move. In most European
nations registration is done for you, a utomatically, by
the government. Since it is costly to register in this
country and costless to register in other countries, it
shou Id not be surprising that fewer people are reg is tered here than abroad.
In 1993 Congress passed a law designed to make it
easier to register to vote. Known as the motor-voter law,
the law requires states to allow people to register to vote
when applying for driver"s licenses and to provide registration through the mail and at some state offices that
serve the disabled or provide public assistance (such as
welfill"e checks). The motor-voter law took effect in
1995 . In just two months, 630,000 new voters signed
up in twenty-seven states. Even so, the results of the
law so fill" have been mixed. By 1999, registration in
motor vehicle offices accounted for a third of all voter
registration applications, and in 2001-2002 over 16
million people, representing over 40 percent of all voter
applications, registered in motor-vehicle offices (see
Figure 8.1 ). Still, there is scant evidence that the motorvoter law has had much of an impact on either voter
turnout or election outcomes. A 2001 study found that
turnout of motor-voter registra nts was lower than that
of other new registrants and concluded "that those
who register when the process is costless are less lil<eiy
to vote."4
A fina l pO int: voting is on ly one way of pa rticipating in politics. It is importa nt (we co uld hardly be
considered a democracy if nobody voted), but it is not

....
A
Turnout as Percentage of
Voting-Age Population
Belg ium
Denma rk
A ustralia
Swe den
Fi nla nd
Germany
New Zeala nd
Norway
Austria
France
Netherla nds
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
UNITED STATE-S
Switzer land

83.2%
83. 1
81.8
77 .7
76 .8
75 .3
74.6
73.0
72 .6
72 .3
70 .1
59.0
57 .6
54.6
41.2
34.9

B
Turnout as Percentage of
Registered Voters
A ustra lia
Be lgium
Den mark
New Zea lan d
Germany
Sweden
Aust ria
France
Finl an d
No rway
Netherlands
UNITED STATES
Japan
Ca nada
United Ki ngdo m
Sw itze rland

95 .2%
90.6
86.0
83 .1
82 .2
81.4
80.4
79. 7
76 .8
75 .0
73 .2
63.4
62.0
61.2
59.4
43.2

Source: From the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral
Assistance (IDEA), Voter Turnout: A Global Survey (Stockholm, Sweden,

2001 ). Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.

all-important. Joining civic associations, supporting
socia l movements. wr iting to legislators, fighting city
hall- all these and other activities are ways of participating in politics. It is possible tha t, by these measures. Americans participate in politics more than
most Europeans-or a nybody else, for that matter.
Moreover, it is possible that low rates of registration
indicate that people are reasonab ly well satisfied with
how the country is governed. If 100 percent of all
adult Americans registered and voted (especially
under a system that makes registering relatively difficult), it could mean that people were deeply upset
about how things were run. In short, it is not at all
clear whether low voter turnout is a symptom of
political disease or a sign of politica l good health.
The important question about participation is not
how much participation there is but how different

voting-age population

Citi zens who are eligi ble to vote after reaching the minimum age
requirement .

re gi stere d vote r s
t o vote .

Peopl e wh o are re gistered

180

Political Participation

Chapter 8

Figure 8.1

it also requ ires us to look at the composition and
activities of political parties, in terest groups. and the
medi a (the su bj ects of later chapters).
onetheless. votin g is im portant. To understa nd
why parti cipation in America n elections takes th e
form that it does, we must fi rs t understa nd how laws
have determ ined wh o sha ll vote and under what
circumsta nces.

Sources of Voter Registration
Applications, 1999-2004
Military 0.14%

frirr

Disability services 0.25%
Pu blic assistance off ices 2.67%

; - State-designated si tes 2.77%

Oth er

The Rise of the American
Electorate
It is iron ic that relatively few citizens vote in American elections. since it was in this country that the
ma ss of people first became eli gible to vote. At the
ti me the Constitution was ratifi ed, the vote was limited to property owners or taxpayers, but by th e
administration of Andrew Jackson (I S2 9-1S 3 7) it
had been broadened to include virtu a lly a ll white
ma le adu lts. On ly in a few states did property restri ctions persist: they were not abolished in New Jersey
un til 1844 or in North Ca rolin a until I S 56. And. of
course. Afri ca n America n ma les co uld not vote in

Source.' Federal Election Commission, Executive SummaryReport to the Congress, 2004.

kinds of participati on a ffect the kind of government
we get. This questi on ca nnot be a nswered just by
lookin g at voter turn ou t the subj ect of thi s chapter;

MOTOR VOTER
REGISTRATION INSTRUCTIONS
You must compl ete steps 1-3. Failure to provide
this information may jeopardize your registration.
BOX 1

Edn1. your name on the ~n e in box # 1.

BOX 2

PleaSe read the oath and then s;gn your name in the grey shaded area next to the RED
x. This signature attests that you meet the qualifICations of the oath.

BOX 3

Enter your daytime phone number, and date 01birth.

BOX 4

If you are changing your address, or name , or have been registered to vote before,
please wrile the name and address at which you were previously registered in box 4.

I

ORI G IN AL
R EGIST ER

QF VOTIiR

BOX6

00 you want to be registered at the address on your current license or 1.0 . card?
. If Yes, sklp box #5.
. "No. please write the address where you five in box #5. (You may not use a
work address as your residence address.)
If your mailing address is different from the address where you live please write your
mailing address in box #6. (You may not use a work address for mailing purposes.)

I

BOXB

?$ease sign your name next to the REO x an the klwer half of the form.
Please print your name.

OATH
"I declare that the facts relaUng 10 my (JJalifications as a voter recorded on this voter registration fonn are

true. I am a citizen of the United States. I am not presenUy denied my civil rights as a resuh of being con·
victed of an infamous crime. I will have ived in this state. munty. and prednc:t for thirty days immediatefy
preceding the next election al which I offer to vole. and I will be at least eighteen years of age at the time
01 voting.·

SlGNATtRE OF lJOTER _ PlEASE SIGN WlTHNSHADEDAREA

TEUPHONE HllN8E.R

RlNT~ERNANE

14.

DATE OF BIRTH (UONTM-OAY.'rEAR)

PRINT F'ORMER ADORESS

r

AOOAESS Wl-titE YOU UVE

5.

ADDRESS WHERE YOURECEIV£ ~ IoI.AIl

CfTY OR TOWN

""CODE

OTY OR Tc:MIN

~P cooe

6.
FO R
OFFICE

USE
ONLY

AEGlSTRAmN........,.

[[OJ 1 1 I
PAEaNCT COOE

I I I I I I II

IIIII

....CN:T ......

DATE OF REGGTAATION

Knowlnglv provkHng tatse InforrnlUon on
(his voter registn,Hon form or knowingty
making. talse declanlUon about your qu8f~
lications for registration Is ectau C le lony
that Is punishable by irnPfisonment lor up

to fIVe years, or by e fme ncX (0 exc.-d ten
lhousand dollars, Of by both auch mprisonment and flfle . (RCW Z9.D7.070)

Motor
Voter

.........

REGISTRA now

COUNTY

~ordSigningof

P.titJons Here

rn· rn·OJ

(In hnci )

OISTRCT"-EVV COOE

II I I I I I I

lASTNAME(~

7•

.....

I FlRSTtwoE

I

N
-

SOGN

X

SIGNATURE OF VOTER

s.

WTER · PlEASE PRINT NAME HERE
STftEEToUO

""COOE

CITY

RECORO SK>I«NG OF PETITCINS

-'

s.c,ewyol~.FotmVR -1M

When Y OLI apply for a dri ver's license in the state of Wasi'lil'l{jton, !lOll are {jivell thi s for m so tha t
can register to vote at the same time. This "motor- voter" idea hecame the IJnsis of a federnl
la w passed in 1993.

!lOLl

.....X

VOTER - PlEASE PRINT FUll NAME HERE
(AREACOOe)

WARNING
BOX 7

I I

SlCN

2.

1.
3.

BOX 5

I

'ded<lre lhal !he lactsretaling 10 my quaIiications asa \tOler rteOtded on thiS'IIOtef rvgisIralionlorm .... ettue. I am a citizen 01
!he United States, I am nol presentry denied my cMl rights as a tesuIt Of bei~ COf1Yicted 01 an Inlamous crime,l wII have IiYed
in this state, county, and precind tor Ihl({ydays immediatety preceding the next eledion atwtich I ofler to vote, 300 I Will be at
least eighteen years Of age at hi tim. Of YOting:

I

I-ERE

{In

1"""'
PIInciII

mON"""

The Rise of the American Electo rate
many states, in the North as well as the South, even
if they were not slaves. Women could not vote in
most states until the twentieth century; Chinese
Americans were widely denied the vote; an d being in
prison is gro unds for losing the franch ise even today.
Aliens, on the other hand , were often a ll owed to vote
if they had at least begun the process of becoming
citizens. By 1880 only an estimated 14 percent of a ll
adu lt ma les in the United States could not vote; in
England in the same period about 40 percent of adult
males were disfranchised. 5

From State to Federal Control
Initially it was left entirely to the states to decide who
could vote and for what offices. The Constitu tion
gave Congress the right to pick the day on which
presidential electors would gather and to alter state
regulations regarding congressional elections. The
only provision of the Constitution requiring a popular election was the clause in Article I stating that
members of the House of Representatives be chosen
by the "people of the several states."
Because of this permissiveness, early federal elections varied greatly. Severa l states picked their members of the House at large (that is, statewide) rather
than by district; others used districts but elected
more than one representative from each. Still others
had their elections in odd-numbered years, and some
even required that a congressional candidate win a
majority, rather than simp ly a plurality, of votes to be
elected (when that requirement was in effect, runoff
elections- in one case as many as twelve- were necessary). Furthermore, presidential electors were at
first picked by state legislatures rather than by the
voters directly.
Congress, by law and constitu tional amen dment,
h as stead ily reduced state prerogatives in these m atters. In 1842 a federal law required that all mem bers
of the House be elected by districts; other laws over
the years required that a ll federal elections be held in
even-numbered years on the Tuesday following the
first Monday in November.
The most important changes in elections have
been those that extended the suffrage to women,
African Americans, and eighteen-year-olds and
made mandatory the direct popu lar election of U.S.
senators. The Fifteenth Amend ment, adopted in
1870, said that the "rig ht of citizens of the Un ited
States to vote shall not be den ied or abridged by the
United States or by any state on account of race,

color, or previous cond ition of serv itude." Reading
those words today, one would assume that they gave
African Americans the right to vote. That is not what
the Supreme Court during the 1870s thought they
meant. By a series of decisions, it held that the Fifteenth Amendment did not necessarily confer the
right to vote on anybody; it merely asserted that if
someone was denied that right, the denial could not
be explicitly on the grounds of race. And the burden
of proving that it was race that led to the denia l fell
on the black who was turned away at the pOllS. 6
This interpretation opened the door to a ll manner
of state stratagems to keep blacks from voting. One
was a literacy test (a large proportion of forme r
slaves were ill iterate); another was a requirement
th at a poll tax be paid (most former slaves were
poor); a third was the practice of keeping blacks from
votin g in primary elections (in the one-party Sou th
the on ly meaningful election was the Democratic primary). To a ll ow whites who were illiterate or poor to
vote, a grandfather clause was added to the law,
saying that a person could vote, even if he did not
meet the lega l requirements, if he or h is ancestors
voted before 1867 (blacks, of course, could not vote
before 1867). When all else fai led, blacks were intimidated. threatened , or harassed if they showed up at
the po ll s.
There began a long, slow legal process of challenging in court each of these restrictions in turn.
One by one the Supreme Court set most of them
aside. The grandfather clause was declared unconstitutional in 1915. 7 and the white primary finally
fe ll in 1944. 8 Some of the more blatantly discriminatory literacy tests were also overturned. 9 The practical result of these rulings was slight: only a small
proportion of voting-age blacks were able to register

literacy test A requirement that citizens pass
a literacy test in order to register to vote.
poll tax A requirement that citizens pay a tax
in order to register to vote.
grandfatber clause A clause in registration
laws allowing peopl e who do not meet regist ration requi rements to vote if they or their
ancestors had voted before 1867.
white primary The practice of keeping blacks
from voting in the southern states' primaries
through arbitrary use of registration requirements and intim idation.

181

182

Chapter 8

Po li tical Participation

WBITE IUrIIM4~Yl
Attention, White Men!

f~ran~ forrHi[ht rrore~~ion
At JACRSON,
On the Night of the

Fourth of January, 1990.
The Final Settlement of Democrati c Rule
and White Supremacy in Mississippi.
( j

n

FL'. 'J

PY H( IT1.:C H :-'· 1( '

Dl fo'l' L A YI

Transparencies aod Torches Free for all.

All in S y mpathy with th e Grand Cause
are Cordially and Earne stly Invited to be
on hand, to a id in the Fina l Ov erthrow of
R a dical Rule in our State.
( 'o n ...

O il

hc' ..... rt' t ..

fout o r on hor.... '. ltaf' k ;

~ t· '

"OIUf~

u n,. ,"a"

hut

th t"r ('.

lira •• Hllnd_, ( 'lIlIn o ll , Fla mbc'a ll T .. r'·h.·•• T rnn.1".rc'II""·., S k , .ro .. k,·I., E I('.

AGRAND DISPLAY FOR AGRAND CAUSE.
After Reconstruction ended in 1876, lJiack voting shrank
under the attack of white supremacists.

After th e Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed, IJlacks and
whites voted together in a small AialJama town.

and vote in the South. and they were found mostly in
the larger cities. A dramatic change did not begin
until 1965 . with the passage of the Voting Rights
Act. This act suspended the use of literacy tests and
authorized the appointment of federal examiners
who could order the registration of blacks in states
and counties (mostly in the South) where fewer than
50 percent of the voting-age population were registered or had voted in the last presidential election. It
also provided criminal penalties for interfering with
the right to vote.
Though implementation in some places was slow,
the number of Afri can Americans voting rose
sharply throughout the South. For example, in Mississippi the proportion of voting-age blacks who registered rose from 5 percent to over 70 percent in just
ten years (see Table 8.2). These changes had a profound effect on the behavior of many white sou thern

politicians: Governor George Wallace stopped making prosegregation speeches and began courting the
black vote.
Women were kept from the polls by law more than
by intimidation, and when the laws changed, women
almost immediately began to vote in large numbers.
By 1915 several states, mostly in the West, had
begun to permit women to vote. But it was not until
the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution was
ratified in 1920. after a struggle lasting many
decades, that women generally were allowed to vote.
At one stroke the size of the eligible voting population almost doubled. Contrary to the hopes of some
and the fears of others, no dramati c ch a nges
occurred in the conduct of elections, the identity of
the winn ers, or the substance of public policy. Initially. at least. women voted more or less in the same
manner as men, though not quite as frequently.

The Rise of the American Electorate

Table 8.2

183

Voter Registration in the South
Percentage of Voting-Age Population That Is Registered
Ala.

Ark.

La.

Miss.

N.C.

S.c.

Tenn.

Tex.

Va.

Total

1960

White
Black*

63 .6%
13 .7

60.9%
38.0

69.3 %
39.4

56.8%
29 .3

76.9%
31 .1

63.9%
5.2

92.1%
39.1

57 .1%
13.7

73.0%
59.1

42 .5%
35.5

46.1%
23 .1

61.1%
29 .1

1970

White
Black

85 .0
66.0

74.1
82.3

65.5
55 .3

71 .7
57 .2

77.0
57.4

82 .1
71.0

68.1
51 .3

62 .3
56.1

78.5
71.6

62 .0
72.6

64.5
57 .0

62 .9
62 .0

1986

White
Black

77 .5
68.9

67.2
57.9

66.9
58.2

62.3
52 .8

67.8
60.6

91 .6
70.8

67.4
58.4

53.4
52 .5

70.0
65.3

79 .0
68.0

60.3
56.2

69.9
60.8

1996

White
Black

75 .8
69.2

64.5
65.8

63 .7
53 .1

67 .8
64.6

74.5
71 .9

75.0
67.4

70.4
65.5

69.7
64.3

66.3
65.7

62 .7
63.2

68.4
64.0

69.0
65.0

2002

White
Black

73.7
67.7

62 .9
62 .0

60.7
47.9

62.7
61 .7

74.2
73 .5

70.7
67 .9

63 .1
58.2

66.2
68.3

62 .3
54.1

57.7
65 .1

64.1
47 .5

62 .6
60.2

Fla.

Ga.

' Includes other minority races.
Source: Voter Education Project. Inc. . of Atlanta. Georgia. as reported in Statistical Abstract of the United States. 1990 and 1996. Figures for 2002

compiled from U.S. Bureau of Census data by Marc Siegal.

The political impact of the youth vote was also less
than expected. The Voting Rights Act of 1970 gave
eighteen-year-olds the right to vote in federal elections beginning January 1, 1971. It also contained a
provision lowering the voting age to eighteen in state
elections, but the Supreme Court declared this unconstitutional. As a result a constitutional amendment,
the Twenty-sixth, was proposed by Congress and ratified by the states in 1971. The 1972 elections
became the first in which all people between the ages
of eighteen and twenty-one could cast ballots (before
then, four states had allowed those under twenty-one
to vote). About 25 million people suddenly became
eli gible to partiCipate in elections. but their turnout
(42 percent) was lower than for the population as a
whole, and they did not !lock to any particular party
or candidate. Since then voter turnout by eighteen- to
twenty-four-year-olds has fa llen both in absolute
terms and relative to rates among senior citizens. For
instance, 22 percent of eighteen- to twenty-four-yearolds, versus three-fifths of citizens older than sixtyfive. voted in the midterm congressional elections of
1986, and just 17 percent of them voted. versus the
same three-fifths of citizens older than Sixty-five. in
the midterm congressional elections of 1998.10 In
the 1996 presidential election turnout among eighteen- to twenty-four-year-olds was about 30 percent.
rising to about 38 percent in the 2000 presidential
election, then dipping slightly below 20 percent in the

2002 midterm congressional elections. 11 At the same
time, however. young Americans' rates of participation in civic activities such as community service
have hit all-time highs. Several studies fmd that both
the fraction of adults under thirty who volunteer and
the average number of hours they volunteer per
year have increased significantly over the past generation.1 2 The late Senator Paul Wellstone of Minnesota, a liberal Democrat who taught political science
and who was a campus political protester during the
1970s and 1980s. believed that among young people
today, "community service is viewed as good, and
political service is viewed as disreputable. "13 Systematic stud ies of the subject are few, but the senator was
probably right. 14
National standards now govern almost every
aspect of voter eligibility. All persons eighteen years
of age and older may vote; there may be no literacy
test or poll tax; states may not require residency of
more than thirty days in that state before a person
may vote; areas with significant numbers of citizens
not speaking English must give those people ba llots
written in their own language; and federal voter registrars and poll watchers may be sent into areas
where less than 50 percent of the voting-age population participates in a presidential election. Before
1961 residents of the District of Columbia could not
vote in presidential elections; the Twenty-third
Amendment to the Constitution gave them this right.

184

Chapter 8

Political Participation
ulation that has gone to the polls in presid ential elections has remained about the same- between 50
and 60 percent of those eligible-at least since 1928
a nd appears today to be much small er tha n it was in
the latter part of the nineteenth century (see Figure
8.2) . In every presidential election between 1860
a nd 1900. at least 70 percent of the eligib le population apparently went to the polls. and in some years
(1860 a nd 1876) almost 80 percent seem to have
voted. Since 1900 not a single presidential election
turnout has reached 70 percent, and on two occasions (1920 and 1924) it did not even reach 50 percent. I S Even outside the South, where efforts to
disfranchise African Americans make data on voter
turnout especially hard to interpret. turnout seems
to have declined: over 84 percent of the voting-age
population participated in presidentia l elections in
nonso uth ern states between 1884 and 1900. but
only 68 percent participated between 1936 and
1960. and eve n fewer have don e so since 1960.]6
Scholars have vigoro usly debated the mea ning of
these figures. One view is that this decline in turnout,
even all owing for the shaky data on which the estimates are based. has been real and is the result of a
decline of popular interest in elections a nd a weaken-

Th e campaign to win the vote for women nationwide succeeded
with the adoption of the Nil1eteentiI Amel1dm ent in 1920.

Ulter Turnout
Given all these legal safeguards. one mi ght expect
that participation in elections wo u ld have risen
sharply. In fact the proportion of the votin g-age pop-

Figure 8.2

Voter Participation in Presidential Elections, 1860-2004

85
80
01)

<=

:;:; 75
ro
a.
70

:g

roa.

~

2o

65

::. 60
o

'"%'
c:
'"OJ
u

55
50

<L

45

1864

1872

1880

1888

1896

1904

1912

1920

1928

1936

1944

1952

1960

1968

Note: Severa l southern states did not participate in the 1864 and 1868 elections.
Sources: For 1860- 1928: Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to
1970, part 2, 1071, 1932- 1944: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1992, 517; 1948-2000: Michael
P. McDonald and Samuel L. Popkin, "The Myth of the Van ishing Voter," American Political Science Review
95 (December 200 1): table 1. 966.

1976

1984

1992

2000

The Rise of the American Electorate
ing of the competitiveness of the two major parties.
Durin g the nineteenth century, according to this theory, the par ties fought hard, worked strenuously to get
as ma ny voters as possib le to the polls, afforded the
mass of voters a chance to participate in party poli tics
through caucuses and conventions, kept the legal barriers to pa rticipation (such as complex registration
procedures) low, and looked forward to close. excitin g
elections. After 1896, by which time the South had
become a one-pa rty Democratic region and the North
heavily Republican , both parties beca me more conservative. nationa l elections usually resulted in lopsided
victories for the Republicans, and citizens began to lose
interest in politics because it no longer seemed relevant to their needs. The parties ceased functi oning as
organizations to mobilize the mass of voters and fell
under th e co ntrol of leaders. mostly conservative, wh o
resisted mass pa rticipation.] 7
Th ere is a nother view. however. It a rgues that the
decline in voter turnout has been more apparent than
rea l. Though elections were certainly more of a popular sport in the nineteenth century tha n they are
today. the parties were no more democratic then than
now. a nd voters then may have been more easily
ma nipu lated. Until around the beginning of the twentieth century. voting fraud was commonplace, because
it was easy to pull off. The political parties, not the government. printed the ballots: they were often cast in
public, not private, votin g booths: there were few seri ous efforts to decide who was eligible to vote, a nd the
rules th at did operate were easily evaded.
Und er these circ umstances it was easy for a person to vote more tha n once, and the party machines
made heavy use of these "floaters. " or repeaters.
"Vote early a nd often " was not a joke but a fact.
The parties often controlled the cou ntin g of votes,
padd ing the tota ls whenever they fea red los ing. As a
resu lt of these machi na tions, the number of votes
coun ted was often larger than the number cast. a nd
the number cast was in turn often la rger tha n the
number of individu a ls eligib le to vote.
Around 1890 the states began adopting the Au stralian ballot. This was a government-printed ba llot
of uniform size and shape that was cast in secret, created to replace the old pa rty-printed ballots cast in
public. By 1910 only three states were without the
Australia n ballot. Its use cut back on (but certainly did
not elimin ate) vote buying and fra udulent vote counts.
In shor t, if votes h ad been lega lly cast a nd honestly counted in the nineteenth century. the sta tistics on

1 85

A "Rock the Vo te" weh site dll ring the 2004 presidential election.
election turnout might well be much lower than the
infl ated fi gures we now have. IS To the exte nt that
this is true, we may not have had a decline in voter
pa rticipation as great as some have suggested. evertheless. most scholars believe th at turnout probably did actually decline somewhat after the 1890s.
One reason was that voter-reg istration regulations
beca me more burdenso me: th ere were longer residency requirements; aliens who had begun but not
completed the process of becoming citizens cou ld no
longer vote in most states; it beca me harder for
African Americans to vote: edu cational qua liftcations for voting were adopted by several states; a nd
voters had to reg ister long in advance of th e elections. These cha nges, des igned to purify the electora l
process, were aspects of the progressive reform
impulse (described in Chapter 9) and served to cut
back on the number of people who co uld pa rticipate
in elections.
Strict voter-registration procedures tended, like
most reforms in America n politics, to have unintended as well as intended consequences. These cha nges
not only reduced fraudu lent voting but a lso reduced
voting generally. beca use they made it more diffi cult
for certa in groups of perfectly honest voters- those
with little education, for exa mple, or those who had

Au stralian ba llot A gove rnment-printed ba llot of un iform dime nsio ns to be cast in secret
th at ma ny states ado pted aro und 1890 to
reduce votin g fr a ud associated w ith part yprinted ba llots cast in publ ic.

186

Chapter 8

Political Participation

recently moved-to register and vote. This was not
the first time, and it wi ll not be the last, that a reform
designed to cure one problem created another.
Following the controversy over Florida 's vote count
in the 2000 presidential election, many proposals
were made to overhau l the nation's voting system. In
2002, Congress passed a measure that for the first
time requires each state to have in place a system for
countLng the disputed ba llots of voters whose names
were left off official registration lists. In addition, the
law provides federal funds for upgrading voting equipment and procedures and for training election officials. But it stops short of creating a uniform national
voting system. Paper ballots, lever machines, and
punch-card voting systems will sti ll be used in some
places, whil e optical scan and direct recording electronic equipment will still be used in others. Following
the 2004 national elections, however, calls to overhaul the nation's voting system were more muted,
partly beca use the popular vote for president was not
terribly close (President Bush received 51 percent.
John Kerry received 48 percent), and partly because in
most states there were few reported problems.
Even after all the lega l ch anges are taken into
account. there seems to have been a decline in citizen
participation in elections. Between 1960 and 1980
th e proportion of voting-age people casting a ba ll ot
in pres idential elections fell by about 10 percentage
poin ts, a drop th at ca nnot be explained by how ballots were printed or how registration rules were
rewritten. Nor can these factors expl a in why 1996
witnessed not only the lowest level of turnout (49
percent) in a pres idential election sin ce 1924 but
also the single steepest four- year decline (from 55
percent in 1992) since 1920.
There is, however, one alternative th eory: voter
turnout has not, in fact, been going down. As we saw
earlier in this chapter (refer back to Table 8.1), there
are different ways of calculating voter turnout.
Turnout mea ns the percentage of the voting-age population that votes: an accurate measure of turnout
means having an accurate count of both how ma ny
people voted and how many people could have voted.
In fact, we do not have very good measures of either
number. Eli gib le voters are derived from census
reports that tell us what the voting-age population
(VAP) is- that is, how ma ny people exist who are age
eighteen and over (or before younger people were
allowed to vote, the number age twenty-one and
over). But within the YAP are a lot of people who cannot vote, such as prisoners, felons, and aliens.

Table 8.3

..

Year

Voting Age
Population (VAP)

Voting Eligible
Population (VEP)

1948
1952
1956
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000

51.1 %
61 .6
59.3
62.8
61.9
60 .9
55.2
53.5
52.8
53 .3
50.3
55 .0
48.9
51. 2

52 .2 %
62 .3
60.2
63 .8
62.8
61.5
56.2
54.8
54.7
57 .2
54.2
60.6
52 .6
55 .6

Source: Adapted from Michael P. McDonald and Samuel L.
Popkin. "The Myth of the Vanishing Voter, " American Political
Science Review 95 (December 2001): table 1, 966. Reprinted
with permission of Cambridge University Press.

Political scientists Michael P. McDonald and Samuel
L. Popkin have adjusted the VAP to take into account
these difTercnces.1 9 They caLi their alternate measure of
turnout the voting eligible population (YEP). Tables 8.3
and 8.4 show how turnout percentages durer depending on which measure, VAP or VEP, is used. Calculated
by the VEP, national voter turnout in presidential elections has not fallen since the early 19 70s. Calculated by

State
Cal iforn ia
Florida
New York
Texas
New Jersey
Connecticut
Arizona
Nevada
Oregon

D.C.

Voting Age
Population (VAP)
44.09 %
50.65
49.42
43.14
51 .04
58.35
42.26
43.81
60.50
48.99

Voting Eligible
Population (VEP)
55 .78 %
59 .75
57.72
50.33
58.24
64.25
48.48
49.86
66.60
54.61

Source: Data from Michael McDonald as reported in Louis
Jacobson , " Recalibrating Voter Turnout Gauges," National
Journal (January 1. 2002).

Who Participates in Po litics?
the VAP, California's turnout rate in the 2000 presidential election was 44 percent, but calculated by the
VEp, it was nearly 56 percent. Whichever measure one
uses, however, two things are the same: the days when
turnout routinely exceeded 60 percent (1952- 1968)
in pres idential elections are gone, and post-1970
turnout in midterm congressional elections has been
a nemic, averaging only 38 to 40 percent, however it is
ca lculated. 2o
Actua l trends in turnout aside. what if they gave an
election and cveryone came? Would universal turnout
change national election outcomes and the content of
public policy? It has long been argued that beca use the
poor, less educated, and minorities are overrepresented among nonvoters, universa l turnout would strongly beneflt Democratic ca ndidates and liberal causes.
But a careful study of this question found that the
"party of nonvoters" la rgely mirrors the demographically diverse and ideo logically divided population that
goes to the polls.21 In 1992 and 1996, for example,
the two most common demographic fea tures of nonvoters were residential mobi li ty and youth: "fully 43
percent of nonvoters had moved within two years of
the election and one third were under the age of thirty. "22 If everyone who was eligible had voted in those
elections, Bill Clinton's winning margin over George
Bush the elder and Bob Dole, respectively. wou ld have
been a bit wider, but there would have been "no Mother Lode of votes for Democratic candidates or pressure
l'or libera l ca uses."23

~ Who Participates in Politics?
To understa nd better why voter turnout declined and
what, if anything, that decl ine may mean, we must
first look at who participates in politiCS.

Forms of Participation
Voting is by far the most common form of political
participation, while giving mon ey to a ca ndidate and
being a member of a politica l organization a re the
least common. Many Americans exaggerate how frequently they vote or how active they a re in politics.
In a study by Sidney Verba and Norma n Nie, 72 percent of those interviewed sa id that they voted "regula rly " in presidential elections.24 Yet we know that
since 1960, on average only 56 percent of the votingage population has actually cast presidentia l ballots.
Carefu l studies of this discrepancy suggest that 8 to

Figure 8.3

187

Nonpolitical Voluntary Activity Among
Citizens

Affi Iiated with
nonpo li tica l orga ni zation
Attend meeting of
nonpo lit ica l organization

68%
37 %

Attend church services
once a month or more
Attend church
se rvic es weekly
Give tim e to church work

57 %
32%
25%
62%

Church contribution
Give ti me to
charitabl e work

36%
66%

Charitab le co ntribution
Percent active

Source: Sidney Verba et aI. , Voice and Equality: Civic Voluntarism in American Politics (Ca mbridge: Harva rd Unive rsity

Press, 1995), 77-7 9.

10 percent of Americans interviewed misreport their
voting habits: they claim to have voted when in fa ct
they have not. Young, low-income, less-educated,
a nd nonwhite people are more likely to misreport
than others. 25 If peo ple misreport their vo ting
behavior, it is likely that they also misreport- that is,
exaggerate- the extent to which they participate in
other ways.
Indeed, most research shows that "politics is not at
the heart of the day-to-day life of the American people."26 Work, fa mily, church. and other voluntary
activities come flrst, both in terms of how Americans
spend their time and in terms of the money they
donate. For example, a study by Verba and others found
that a higher proportion of citizens tal<e part in nonpolitical than political activities: "More citizens reported
giving time to church-related or charitable activities
than indicated contacting a government o('flcial or
working informally on a community problem, two of
the most frequent forms of politica l participation
beyond the vote" 27 (see Figure 8.3),
In a n earlier study Verba and Nie analyzed the
ways in wh ich people participate in politics and ca me

188

Chapter 8

Political Participation

up with six forms of participation that are characteristic of six different kinds of U.S. citizens. About onefifth (22 percent) of the popul ation is com plete ly
inactive: they rarely vote, they do not get invo lved in
organizations, and they probably do not even talk
about politics very much. These ina ctives typica lly
have little education and low incomes and are relatively young. Many of them are African American.
At the opposite extreme are the compl ete activists,
constitutin g about one-n inth of the population (11
percent). These people are highly educated, have
high incomes, and tend to be middl e-aged rather
than young or old. They tend to participate in all
forms of politics.
Between these extremes are four categories of limited forms of participation. The voting specialists are
people who vote but do little else; they tend not to
have much schoolin g or income and to be substa ntially older than the average person. Campa igners not
on ly vote but also like to get involved in ca mpaign
activities. They are better educated than the average
voter, but what seems to distinguish them most is
their interest in the conflicts, passions, a nd stru ggle
of politics; their clear identification with a poli tica l
party; and their willingness to take strong positions.
Communalists are much like campa igners in social
background but have a very different temperament:
they do not like the conflict and tension of partisan
campaigns. They tend to reserve their energy for
community activities of a more nonpartisan
nature-forming and joinin g organ izations to dea l
with local problems and contacting local officials
about these problems. Finally, there are so me
paroch ial participants, who do not vote and stay out of
election campa igns and civic associations but are
willing to contact local officia ls about specific, often
persona l. problems. 28

The Causes of Participation
Whether participation takes the form of voting or
being a complete activist, it is higher among people
who have gone to college than among those who
have not and higher among people who are over

activists People who tend to participate in all
forms of politics.

forty-four years of age tha n among those who are
under thirty-five. (The differences in voting rates for
these gro ups are shown in Figure 8.4.) Even after
controlling for differen ces in income and occupation.
the more schooling one has, the more li kely one is to
vote. Of course, it may not be schooling itself that
causes participation but something that is strongly
correlated with schooling, such as high levels of
political information. 29
In fa ct the differences in participation that are
associated with schooling (or its correlates) are probably even greater than reported in this figure, since
we have alrea dy seen that less-educated people exaggerate how frequently they vote. An excellent study of
turnout concludes that people are more likely to vote
when they have those personal qualities that "make
learn ing about politics easier and more gratifying."3o
Religious involvement also increases political participation. If you a re a regular churchgoer who takes
your fa ith seri ously. the ch a nces are that you will be
more likely to vote and otherwise take part in politics
than if you are a person of the same age. sex.
income, and educational level who does not go to
church. Church involvement leads to social connectedness, teaches organizational skills, increases one's
awareness of larger issues, and puts one in contact
with li ke-minded people. 31
Men and women vote at about the sa me rate. but
blacks and whites do not. Although at one time that
difference was largely the resul t of di scri mination ,
today it can be explained mostly by differences in
social class- blacks are poorer and have less schooling. on average, than whites. However, among people
of the same socioeconomic status- that is, having
roughly the sa me level of income and schoolingbl acks tend to participate more than whites. 32
Because the popu lation has become younger (due
to the baby boom of the 1960s and 1970s) and
because blacks have increased in numbers faster
than whites. one might suppose that these demograp hic changes would explain why the turnout in
presidential elections has gone down a bit since the
ea rly 1960s. And they do- up to a point. But there is
a nother factor that ought to ma ke turnout go upschooling. Since college graduates are much more
likely to vote than those with less educational experience. and since the college-graduate proportion of
the population has gone up sh arply, turnout should
have risen. But it has not. What is going on here?

Who Participates ill Po litics?
Voter Turnout in Presidential Elections, by Age, School ing, and Race, 1964-2000

Figure 8.4

AGE
-

90

'"

60

'"uQ;

50

Oll

2c

a..

40
30
20

-

4 years or more of college
1 to 3 years of co ll ege
High sc hool grad uates
Less than high schoo l

-

White
Black
Hispanic

Data for age 45 and older
are not available for 1996

80
70

RACE

SCHOOLING

Age 65 or older
Age 45 to 64
Age25t044
Age 18 to 24

-

1 89

I

~ ~

::="

----'V-

c:::::::
.....

~
include only age 21 to 24

1964

1972

1980

1988

1996

2004

1964

1972

1980

1988

1996

2004

1964

1972

1980

1988

1996

Sources: Updated from Gary R. Orren, "The Linkage of Policy to Participation," in Presidential Selection, eds.
Alexander Heard and Michael Nelson (Durha m, N.c.: Duke University Press, 1987). Data for 1996 are from
Statistical Abstract of the United States 1998, 296, as supplied by Christopher Blunt. Data for 2000 are from
Statistical Abstract of the United States 2002, 6, as su pplied by Marc Siegal.

Perhaps turnout has declined despite the higher
levels of schooling because of the rising level of distrust of government. We saw in Chapter 4 that, well
into the 1990s, more and more people were telling
pollsters that they lacked confidence in politica l lea ders. Rising distrust seems a plausib le explanation for
declining turnout, until one looks at the facts. The
data show that there is no correlation between
express ing distrust of political leaders and not voting. 33 People who are cynical abo ut our leaders are
just as likely to vote as people who are not.
As we have seen, turnout is powerfully affected by
the number of people who have registered to vote;
perhaps in recent years it has become harder to register. But in fact exactly the opposite is true. Since
1970 federal law has prohibited residency requirements longer than thirty days for presidential elections. and a Supreme Court decision in 1972 held
that requirements much in excess of this were
invalid for state and local elections.34 By 1982 twentyone states and the District of Columbia, containing about half the nation's population, had adopted
laws permitting voters to register by mail. In four
states-Maine, Minnesota, Oregon, and Wisconsin- voters ca n register and vote on the sa me day, all
at once.

What is left? Several small things. First, the greater
youthfulness of the population, together with the
presence of growing numbers of African Americans
and other minorities, has pushed down the percentage of voters who are registered and vote.
Second , political parties today are no longer as
effective as they once were in mobilizing voters,
ensuring that they are registered, and getting them
to the polls. As we shall see in Chapter 9, the parties
once were grassroots organizations with which
many people strongly id entified. Today the parties
are somewhat distant, national burea ucracies with
which most of us do not identify very strongly.
Third, the remaining impediments to registration
exert some influence. One study estimated that if
every state had registration requirements as easy as
the most permissive states, turnout in a presidential
election would be about 9 percent higher. 35 The
experience of the four states where you can register
and vote on the same day is consistent with this: in
1976, when same-day registration first went into
effect, three of the four states that had it saw their
turnout go up by 3 or 4 percent, while those states
that did not have it saw their turnout go down. 36 If
an even bolder plan were adopted , suc h as the Ca nadian system of universal enrollment, whereby the

2004

190

Chapter 8

Political Participation

government automatically puts on the voter list
every eligible citizen, there would probably be some
additional gain in turnout. 3 7
Fourth, if not voting is costless, then there will
be more nonvoting. Several nations with higher
turnouts than ours make voting compulsory. For
example, in Italy a person who does not vote has his
or her government identification papers stamped
"DID NOT VOTE. "38 In Australia and other countries
fines can be levied on nonvoters. As a practical matter such fines are rarely imposed, but just the threat
of them probably induces more people to register
and vote.
Finally, voting (and before that, registering) will
go down if people do not feel that elections matter
much. There has been a decline in the proportion of
people who feel that elections matter a lot. corresponding to the decrease in those who do participate
in elections.
In short, there are a number of reasons why we
register and vote less frequently in the United States
than do citizens of other countries. Two careful studies of all these factors found that almost all of the differences in turnout among twenty-four democratic
nations, including the United States, cou ld be
explained by party strength, automatic registration ,
and compulsor y voting laws. 39
The presence of these reasons does not necessarily mean that somebody ought to do something about

POLLING PLACE
31.~

LUGAR DE VOTACION
PRECINCT
jI.~

PRECINTO

674- I

*~~!l~

~§~!A~
In San Francisco, voting instructions are printed in
English, Spanish, and Chinese.

Demonstrations are almost as important as elections in shaping
pulJlic policy.

them. We could make registration automatic- but
that might open the way to voter fraud, since people
move around and change names often enough to
enable some of them, if they wanted to, to vote more
than once. We could make voting compulsory, but
Americans have an aversion to government compulsion in any form and probably would object strenuously to any plan for making citiz ens carry
identification papers that the government wou ld
stamp.
Democrats and Republicans fight over various
measures designed to increase registration and voting because one party (usually the Democrats)
thinks that higher turnout will help them and the
other (usually the Republicans) fears that higher
turnout will hurt them. In fact no one really knows

Who Participates in Politics?

n.ble 8.5

How Citizens Participate
Percentage Engaging in Fourteen
Acts of Participation. 1967 and 1987

Specific Activity

1967

1987

Absolute
Change

Votin~
Regu arly vote in presidential elections
Always vote in local elections

66 %
47

58 %
35

- 8%
- 12

28
26
19

32

8

19
23
4

+4
+1
0
+10
-4

14
11
7
6

24
22
10
7

+10
+11
+3
+1

30
31

34
34

+4
+3

14

17

+3

Campaigning
Persuade others how to vote
Actively work for party or candidate
Attend political meetings or rallies
Contribute money to a party or candidate
Participate in a political club
Contacting Government
Contact local officials: issue-based
Contact state or national officials: issue-based
Contact local officials: particularized
Contact state or national officials: particulari zed
Taking Action in the Community
Wo rk with others on a local pro blem
Act ively participate in community problem-solving
o rganization
Form group t o help solve local problem

13

27

Source: Reprinted by permission of the publisher from Voice and Equality: Civic Voluntarism in American Politics by Sidney Verba, Kay Lehman Schlozman, and Henry A. Brady, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, Copyright © 1995 by the Presidents and Fellows of Harvard College. Data from p. 72 .

whether either party would be helped or h urt by
higher voter turnout.
No nvoters are more likely than voters to be poor.
black or Hispanic. or uneducated, However. the proportion of nonvoters with some college education
rose from 7 percent in 1960 to 39 percent in 1996 ,
In addition the percentage of nonvoters who held
white-collar jobs rose from 33 percent to 50 percent
in the same period , Many of these better-off nonvoters might well have voted Republican had they gone
to the polls, And even if the turnout rates only of
blacks and Hispanics had increased, there would not
have been enough votes added to the Democratic column to affect the outcome of the 1984 or 1988 presidential elections,40
Both po li tical parties try to get a larger turno ut
among voters likely to be sympathetic to them. but it
is hard to be sure that these efforts will produce real
ga ins. If one party works hard to get its nonvoters to

the polls. the other party will work just as hard to get
its people there, For example. when Jesse Jackson ran
for the presidency in 1984. registration of southern
blacks increased. but registration of southern whites
increased even more,

The Meaning of Participation Rates
Americans may be voting less. but there is evidence
that they are participating more, As Table 8.5 shows.
between 1967 and 1987 the percentage of Americans
who voted regularly in presidential and local elections
dropped. but the percentage who participated in ten
out of twelve other political activities increased.
steeply in some cases, Thus, although Americans are
going to the polls less. they are campaigning. contacting government officials. and working on community
issues more, And while the proportion of the population that votes is lower in the United States than in

191

192

Chapter 8

Political Participation

..
Percentage of adult population who engaged in some form of
political participation beyond voting in 1990.

Britain
Sweden
Norway
UNITED STATES
Denmark
France
West Germany

77%
74
68
66
59
57
57

Italy
Iceland
Netherlands
Belgium
Ireland
Finland
Spain

56%
55
54
51
46
38
32

Sources: u.s. percentage calculated from Sidney Verba et ai, Voice and
Equality: Civic Voluntarism in American Politics (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1995), 83; other percentages calculated from Max Kaase
and Kenneth Newton, Beliefs in Govemment vol 5 (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1995), 51 .

many other democracies, the percentage of Americans who engage in one or more political activities
beyond voting is higher (see Table 8.6).
Public demonstrations such as sit-ins and protest
marches have become much more common in recent
decades than they once were. By one count there
were only 6 demonstrations per year between 1950
and 1959, but over 140 per year between 1960 and
196 7, Though the demonstrations of the 1960s
began with civil rights and antiwar activists , public
protests were later employed by farmers demanding
government aid, truckers denouncing the national
speed limit, people with disabilities seeking to dramatize their needs, parents objecting to busing to achieve
racial balance in the schools, conservationists hoping
to block nuclear power plants, and construction
workers urging that nuclear power not be blocked. 41
Although we vote at lower rates here than people
do abroad , the meaning of our voting is different. For
one thing we elect far more public officials than do
the citizens of any other nation, One scholar has
estimated that there are over a half million elective
offices in the United States and that almost every
week of the year there is an election going on somewhere in this country.42
A citizen of Massachusetts, for example, votes not
only for the U.S, president but also for two senators,
the state governor, the member o[ the House of Representatives for his or her district, a state representa-

tive, a state senator. the state attorney general. the
state auditor, the state treasurer, the secretary of
state, a county commissioner, a sheriff, and clerks of
various courts, as well as (in the cities) for the mayor,
the city councillor. and school committee members
and (in towns) for selectmen, town-meeting members, a town moderator, library trustees, health board
members, assessors, water commissioners, the town
clerk, housing authority members, the tree warden,
and the commissioner of the public burial ground,
(There are probably others that we have forgotten.)
In many European nations, by contrast, the voters
get to make ju st one choice once every four or five
years: they can vote for or against a member of parliament. When there is only one election for one
office every several years, that election is bound to
assume more importance to voters than many elections for scores o[ offices. But one election [or one
office probably has less effect on how the nation is
governed than many elections for thousands of
offices, Americans may not vote at high rates, but
voting affects a far greater part of the political system
here than abroad,
The kinds o[ people who vote here are also different from those who vote abroad. Since almost everybody votes in many other democracies, the votes cast
there mirror almost exactly the social composition of
those nations, Si nce on ly slightly over h alf of the
voting-age population turns out even for presidential elections here, the votes cast in the United States
may not truly reflect the country.
That is in fact the case. The proportion of each
major occupational group- or if you prefer, social
class- votes at about the same rate in Japan and
Sweden, But in the United States the turnout
is heavily skewed toward higher-status persons:
those in professional, managerial, and other whitecollar occupations are overrepresented among the
voters.4 3
Although nonwhites and Latinos are the fastestgrowing segment of the U.S. population, they tend to
be the most underrepresented groups among American voters. Little is known about the relationship
between political participation and variables such as
command of the language and involvement in nonpolitical institutions that provide information or
impart skills relevant to politics (such as workplaces
and voluntary associations), However, su ch [actors
could be quite important in explaining differences in

Who Participates in Politics?

Figure 8.5

193

Electoral and Nonelectoral Political Participation Among Anglo Whites, African Americans, and
Latinos

Each bar shows
the percentage
of an ethnic
group that:

Anglo Whites

•

African Americans

•

Latinos

76 .8%
---~-r-_____"""'-"""""'" 69 .1%

Votes

Works on campaigns

15.5%
Contributes to campaigns

20.2%

Gets invo lved in
community issues

Serves on a com munity
governing board

3.2 %
2 .3%

4.1 %
36.9%

Contacts public officials

r - - -...... 22.8%

Protests

Source: Adapted from Sidney Verba, Kay Lehman Sch lozman, Henry Brady, and Norman H. Nie, Voice and
Equality: Civic Voluntarism in American Politics, (Cam bridge: Harvard University Press, 1995).

po litical participation rates among poor and minority citizens. As we can see in Figure 8.5, blacks,
though less involved than whites, participate in voting and political activities at higher rates than do
Latinos. One excellent study suggests that these differences are due in part to the fa ct that blacks are
more likely than Latinos to be members of churches
that stimu late political interest. activity. and mobilization .44 Language barriers also make it harder for
many Latinos to get in touch with a public official.
serve on local governing boards. and engage in other
forms of political participation in which command of

English is an asset. The lower participation rates of
minority citizens are likely compounded by their
being disproportionately of low socioeconomic status compared to white Americans.
Exactly what these differences in participation
mean in terms of how the government is run is not
entirely clear. But since we know from evidence presented in the last chapter that upper-status persons are
more likely to have an ideological view of politics, it
may suggest that governance here is a bit more sensitive not only to the interests of upper-status white people but also to their (conflicting) ideologies.

Caucus Declares "Savin
Democracy"
Means g
Ft
t
lnlng Nonvoters
May 30
SACRAMENTO CA
Voting has n;ver b
time, but a report is:l~~d A~l1erica 's favo rite pasDemocracy Cal/Cl/<de J
y the state senate's
cares th t "
.
a CIVIC epIdemic" that "can b a nonvotUlg is now
nonvoters as they d .
est be cured by fining
0 111 SOllle ot! . d
leI elllocracies". ..
" .

MEMORANDUM

c

To: Shena Sellers-Crawley, state senator
From: Chuck Brutsche, legislative analyst
Subject: Ca ucus proposal to fine nonvoters
In the 1990s barely half of the electorate voted for president, and only a third or so
cast ballots for the U.S. House of Representatives . In a few recent presidential primaries
and statewide special elections, turnout has run 10 percent or below. In the mid-1960s,
47 percent of people who did not finish high school and one-third of people in their
early twenties voted in the most recent election, but by the mid-1990s only onequarter of the former group and one-fifth of the latter group did so . Does fining
nonvoters make good sense, and would it work?
Arguments for:
1. Australia instituted compulsory voting after its turnout rate fell below 60 percent in
1922. Italy did the same after World War II. Since the early 1920s Australia's turnout
has never fallen below 90 percent, and since the early 19505 Italy's has averaged
between 85 and 90 percent.
2. The usual fine for nonvoting in these countries is under fifty dollars. Judges or
other officials excuse people who are too sick to vote or have other val id excuses.
3. The law sends a moral message that voting is a civic duty in a democracy. More
citizens will feel morally obliged to vote if all citizens are legally obliged to vote .
Arguments against:
1. Americans vote in more elections and participate in more political activities beyond
voting than other democratic peoples do. Other reforms- streamlining voter
registration requirements, holding elections on weekends, making election day a
national holiday, increasing get-out-the-vote public service ads-are worth trying
instead .
2. Most Americans would probably assert that they have a right not to vote, and many
would simply refuse to pay even a small fine for not voting . What then, jail them?
3. Compelling people with limited or no political knowledge to vote leads to what
Australians aptly call the "donkey vote ." It is both unwise and undemocratic to
legally oblige people to vote .
Your decision:
Favor proposal _ __ _
Oppose proposal _ __

Summary

*

SUMMARY

T

he popular view that Americans don't vote as a
res ul t of apathy is not quite right. It is nearer to
the truth to say that we don 't all register to vote and
don 't always vote even when registered. There are
many fa ctors having nothing to do with apathy that
shape our participation rates-age, race, party
organization, the barriers to registration, and popular views about the sign ifi cance of elections.

Compared to other nations, Americans vote at
lower rates but more frequently and for many more
offices, so elections make a bigger difference in the
conduct of public affairs here than abroad. We also
engage somewhat more frequently than do people
abroad in various nonelectoral forms of participation.

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?
J. Who votes, who doesn't?

The most powerful determinants of voting are age
(older people vote more than yo unger people) and
education (college graduates vote more than high
school graduates). Race makes a difference, but black
participation rates approximate white rates once you
control for socioeconomic status.
2. Why do some people participate in politics at
higher rates thal1 others?
Older people and college graduates have learned to
have a greater interest in politics, in part because they

see ways in which government policies will affect
them, in part beca use they may have acq uired a political ideology that makes politics intr insically interesting. As we have seen, Americans vote less than people
in most other democratic nations. That gap is in part
the result of the failure of many Americans to register to vote; efforts to increase registration, such as the
motor-voter law, have got more n ames onto the voting rolls, but these new additions often do not vote as
often as do other registered voters.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. How did the Framers of the Constitution think
average citizens should participate in America's
representative democracy?
The Framers believed that citizens should play an
important but not the decisive role in the American
Republic. They elect the House, but until the Constitution was amended in 1913, they did not elect the
Senate; the pres id ent and senators, not ordinary
people, select federal judges; and the president is
chosen by electors. Over time the system has become
much more responsive to public opinion. Voters now
help pick party ca ndidates through party primaries,
and their views are regularly solicited by opinion
polls.

2. Should today's college-age citizens participate
more in politics?
We would say yes, but the fact is that many young
adults seem less disposed to traditional forms of political activity, including voting, than they are toward
other types of civic engagement, such as community
service or volunteer work. One forecast to ponder:
unless youth voting rates increase relative to those of
senior citizens, then, on Election Day 2020, persons
age sixty-five and older (about 22 percent of the general population) will cast a quarter of all ballots, while
persons ages eighteen to twenty-nine (about 21 percent of the general population) will account for less
than an eighth of the voting electorate.

195

196

Chapter 8

Political Participatiol1

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

Information for voters
Democracy et:
http://www.congress.org/ congressorg/ e4/
League of Women Voters: http://www.lwv.org/
Voter Information Services: http://www.vis.org/
Women 's Voting Guide:
http://www.womenvote.org/resources

Nationa l Ma il Voter Registration Form:
http://www.fec. gov /votregis/vr.shtmI
The Van ishing Voter:
http://www.vanishingvoter.org/
Voter turnout statistics:
http://www.fec.gov/pages /electpg.htm

SUGGESTED READINGS
Burnh a m. Wa lter Dean. Critim l Electiolls IIl1d ti,e Maillsprill(Js of
Alllerimll Politics. New York: Norton. J 970. An argum ent
about th e declin e or voter pa rti cipation. linki ng it to changes
in th e eco nomic system .
Conway. M. Margaret. Political Participatioll ill tile Ullited States. 2d
cd. Wash in gton. D. C. : Congressiona l Quarterly Press. 199 J.
Good brief summary of what we need to know aboul wh o participates in po li tics and why.
Green . Dona ld P. . and Al a n S. Gerbec. Gel alit tile Vote! : How to
Ill crease Voter 1imwlIL. Washin gton. D. C.: Brookin gs Institution
Press. 2004. Exce ll e nt rev ie w or the evid e nce on what
works- and what doesn' t- to get more people to th e polls.
Eisner. Ja ne. Takill!J Back ti,e Vote: Gettillg Alllerica ll YOlltil Ill volved ill
all,. Owwc/'ll cy. Bosto n: Beaco n Press. 2004. Hi ghly readable
account o r why today's co ll ege-age Ameri can s volunteer lots
but vote littl e. with recommendation s ror getting young peop le
more interested in politics.

Verba. Sidn ey. ct a l. Voice alld Eqllality: Civic VollllltarislI/ ill AII/eriCIIII Poli tics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 1995 .
Verba. Sidn ey. Norm an H. Nie. and Jae-on Kim . Participatioll alld
Political Eqllalit!l. Ca mbridge: Cambr idge Uni vers ity Press.
'19 78 . Co mpara ti ve study of politica l participation in seven
nati o ns.
Wo lnn ger. Raymond E.. and Steven R. Roscnston e. Wlw Votes?
New Have n. COlln.: Ya le University Press. 19 i) O. Excellent
ana lys is or what fa ctors determin e turn o ut.

CHAPTER

9

Political Parties

Parties-Here and Abroad
Political Culture

The Rise and Decline of the Political
Party
The Founding • The Jacksonians •
The Civil War and Sectionalism •
The Era of Reform • Party
Realignments • Party Decline

The National Party Structure Today
National Conventions

State and Local Parties
The Machine • Ideological Parties •
Solidary Groups • Sponsored Parties •
Personal Following

The Two-Party System
Minor Parties
Nominating a President
Are the Delegates Representative of
the Voters? • Who Votes in Primaries?
• Who Are the New Delegates?

Parties Versus Voters

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

2.

How has America 's two-party system
changed, and how does it differ
f rom the party systems of other
representative democracies?
How much do pa rti es affect how
Americans vote ?

2.

Did the Found ing Fathers think that
political parties were a good idea?
How, if at all, should Ame rica's twopa rty system be reformed?

O

ne of the reasons why voter turnout is higher abroad than in this
country is that political parties in other democratic nations are more
effective at mobilizing voters than are those here. The sense of being a party
member and the inclination to vote the party ticket are greater in France,
Italy, and Sweden than in the United States. From this fact you might suppose that political parties here are recent inventions with little experience at
organizing and no history of attracting voter identification.
Quite the contrary. American political parties are the oldest in the world,
and at one time being a Democrat or a Republican was a serious commitment that people did not make lightly or abandon easily. In those days it
would have been hard to find anything in Europe that could match the votegetting power of such party organizations as those in Chicago, New York,
and Philadelphia.
Parties in the United States are relatively weak today, not because they
are old but because the laws and rules under which they operate have taken
away much of their power at the same time that many voters have lost their
sense of commitment to party identification. This weakening has proceeded unevenly, however, because our constitutional system has produced a
decentralized party system just as it has produced a decentralized governmental system, with the result that parties in some places are strong and in
other places almost nonexistent.

~

Parties-Here and Abroad

A polit ical party is a group that seeks to elect candidates to public office by
supplying them with a label- a "party identification "-by which they are
known to the electorate. 1 This definition is purposefully broad so that it will
include both familiar parties (Democratic. Republican) and unfamiliar ones
(Whig, Libertarian, Socialist Workers) and will cover periods in which a
party is very strong (having an elaborate and well-disciplined organization
that provides money and workers to its candidates) as well as periods in
which it is quite weak (supplying nothing but the label to candidates). The
label by which a candidate is known mayor may not actually be printed on
the ballot opposite the candidate's name: in the United States it does appear
on the ballot in all national elections but in only a minority of municipal
ones; in Australia and Israel (and in Great Britain before 1969) it never
appears on the ballot at all.

198

Parties-He re and Abroad

Figure 9.1
-

199

Decline in Party Identification. 1952-2002
Strong Democrat

--

Weak Democrat

-

Independent

-

Strong Republi can

- - - Weak Republi ca n

45
40
35
30

ClI
OJ)

ro

"E
ClI

25

i:'
ClI

(L

20
15
10

5

1952

1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

Source: Nationa l Election Studies, The NES Guide to Public Opinion and Electoral Behavior, 1952-2000,
tab le 20 .1, and data for 2002 updated by M arc Sieg al.

This definition suggests the three political arenas
within which parties may be found. A party exists as
a label in the minds of the voters, as an organization
that recruits and campaigns for candidates, and as a
set of leaders who try to organize and control the legislative and executive branches of government. A
powerful party is one whose label has a strong appeal
for the voters, whose organization can decide who
will be candidates and how their campaigns will be
managed, and whose leaders can dominate one or all
branches of government.
American parties have become weaker in all three
arenas. As a label with which voters identify, the parties are probably much weaker than they were in the
nineteenth century but only somewhat weaker than
they were forty years ago (see Figure 9.1). In 1952 , a
total of 36 percent of the electorate identified strongly as Democrats (22 percent) or Republicans (14 percent) , while a total of 23 percent of the electorate
identified as independents. By 2002 , total strong
party identifiers had dropped to 33 percent of the
electorate, while all independents had risen to 36
percent of the electorate. But the best evidence of
weakening party identification is what voters do. As
we shall see in the next chapter, in some elections
many people vote split tickets- that is, supporting a

president from one party and members of Congress
from the other.
As a set oj leaders who organize government, especially Congress, political parties remain somewhat
strong in ways that will be described in Chapter 13.
As organizations that nominate and elect candidates.
parties have become dramatically weaker since the
1960s. In most states parties have very little control
over who gets nominated to office. The causes and
consequences of that change are the subject of this
chapter.
In Europe things are very different. Almost the
only way a person can become a candidate for elective office is to be nominated by party leaders. Campa igns are run by the party. using party funds and
workers, not by the candidate. Once in office the
elected officials are expected to vote and act together
with other members of their party. The principal criterion by which voters choose among candidates is
their party identification or label. This has been
changing somewhat of late: European parties, like

political party A group that seeks to e lect
candidates to publi c office.

200

Chapter 9

Political Parties

There are usually mal1Y more political parties ill parlim l1el1tary regimes tlra/1 in the Ullited States. Here, a Ukra inial1
voter looks at ads for thirty-two parties in 2002.

American ones, have not been able to co un t as heavily as in the past on party loyalty a mong the voters.
Several factors exp lain the strikin g differences
between American and European political parties.
First. the federal system of government in the United
States decentra lizes political authority a nd thus
decentralizes political party organizations. For nearly
two centuries most of the importa nt governmental
decisions were made at the state and local levelsdecisions regarding education, land use, business regul ation , and public welfare-a nd thus it was at the
state and loca l levels that the important stru ggles over
power and policy occurred. Moreover. most people
with political jobs- either elective or appo intiveworked for state and local government, and thus a
party's interest in obtaining these jobs for its foll owers
meant that it had to focus attention on who controlled city hall, the county courthouse, and the state
ca pitol. Federalism . in short. meant that politica l parties would acquire jobs and money from local sources
and fight local contests. This, in turn. meant that the
national political parties wou ld be coa li tions of loca l
parties, a nd though these coalitions would have a
keen interest in capturing the presidency (w ith it,
after all, went control of large numbers of federa l
jobs), the national party lea ders rarely had as much
power as the loca l ones. The Republica n leader of
Cuyahoga County, Ohio, for example, could often
ignore the decisions of the Republican national chairman and even of the Ohio state chairman.
Political authority in the United States has of late
come to be far more centralized: the federal govern-

ment now makes decisions affecting almost all
aspects of our lives, including those- such as schooling a nd welfare-once left entirely in loca l hand s. Yet
the political parties have not become more centralized as a res ult. If anything, they have become even
weaker and more decentralized. One rea son for this
apparent paradox is that in the Un ited States, unlike
in most other democratic nations, political pa rties
are closely regulated by state a nd federal laws, a nd
these reg ul ations have had the effect of weakening
the power of parties substantially. Perhaps the most
important of these regulations are those that prescribe how a party's ca nd idates are to be selected.
In the great maj ority of American states, the
par ty leaders do not select people to run for office; by
law those peop le are chosen by the voters in primary
elections. Though sometimes the party can influence
who will win a primary contest. in general peop le
running for state or national office in th is country
owe little to party leaders. In Europe. by contra st,
there is no such thing as a primary election- the
on ly way to become a candid ate for offLce is to persuade party leaders to put your name on the ballot.
In a later section of this chapter, the impact of the
direct primary will be di scussed in more deta il; for
now. it is enough to note that its use removes from
the hands of the party leadership its most importan t
so urce of power over officeho lders.
Furthermore. if an American politica l party wins
co ntrol of Co ngress , it does not- as in most European nations with a parliamentary system of governmen t- a lso win the ri ght to select the ch ief
executive of the government. The American president. as we have seen, is ind ependently elected. and
this means th at he will choose his prinCipal subordinates not from among members of Congress but
from among person s out of Co ngress. Shou ld h e pick
a representative or senator for his cabinet, the Constitution requires that person to reSign from Congress in order to accept the job. Thus an opportunity
to be a cabinet secretary is not a n important reward
for members of Congress, and so the president cannot use the prospect of that reward as a way of controlling co ngressiona l action. All this weakens the
Significance and power of parties in terms of organizi ng the government a nd cond ucting its business.

Political Culture
The attitudes and traditions of America n voters reinforce the institutional and legal factors that make

The Rise and Decline of the Political Party
American parties relatively weak. Political parties in
this country have rarely played an important part in
the life of the average citizen: indeed, one does not
usually "join" a party here except by voting for its
candidates. In many Eu ropean nation s, on the other
hand, large numbers of citizens will join a party, pay
dues, and attend regul ar meetings. Furthermore, in
countries such as France, Austria, and Italy, the politica l parties sponsor a wide range of activities and
dominate a variety of associations to which a person
may belong- labor unions, yo uth groups, educational programs. even chess clubs.
In the United States we tend to keep parties separate from other aspects of our lives. As Democrats or
Republicans, we may become excited by a presidential
campaign, and a few of us may even participate in
helping elect a member of Congress or state senator.
Our social, business, working, and cu ltural lives, however, are almost entirely nonpartisan. Indeed, most
Americans, unlike many Europeans, would resent
partisanship's becoming a conspicuous feature of
other organizations to which they belong. All this is a
way of say ing that American parties playa segmental, rather than a comprehensive, role in our lives and
that even this role is diminishing as more and more of
us proclaim ourselves to be "independents."

The Rise and Decline of the
Political Party
Our n ation began without parties. and today's parties, though far from extinct, are about as weak as at
any time in our history. In between the Found ing and
the present, however, parties arose and became powerful. We can see this process in four broad periods of
party history: when political parties were created
(roughly from the Founding to the 1820s) ; when the
more or less stab le two-party system emerged
(roughly from the time of President Jackson to the
Civil War); when parties developed a comprehensive
organizational form and appeal (rough ly from the
Civil War to the 1930s): and finally when party
"reform" began to alter the party system (beginning
in the early 1900s but tak ing effect chiefly since the
ew Deal).

The Founding
The Fo unders disliked parties, thinking of them as
"factions" motivated by ambition and se H~interest.

George Washington, dismayed by the quarreling
between Hamilton and Jefferson in his cabinet,
devoted much of his Farewell Address to condemning parties. This hostility toward parties was understandab le: the legitimacy and success of the newly
created federal government were sti ll very much in
doubt. When Jefferson organized his followers to
oppose Hamilton's policies, it seemed to Hamilton
and his followers that Jefferson was oppos ing not just
a policy or a leader but also the very concept of a
national government. Jefferson, for his part. thought
that Hamilton was not simply pursuing bad policies
but was subverting the Constitution itself. Before
political parties could become legitimate, it was necessary for people to be able to separate in their minds
quarrels over poliCies and elections from disputes
over the legitimacy of the new government itself. The
ability to make that distinction was slow in coming,
and thus parties were objects of profound suspicion,
defended, at first, only as temporary expedients.
The first organized political party in American
history was made up of the followers of Jefferson,
who, beginning in the 1790s, ca lled themselves
Republicans (hoping to suggest thereby that their
opponents were secret monarchists).* The followers
of Hamilton kept the label 1:'ederaiist, which once had
been used to refer to all supporters of the new Constitution (hoping to imply that their opponents were
"Antifederalists, " or enemies of the Constitution) .
These parties were loose caucuses of political
notables in vario us localities, with New England
being stron gly Federalist and much of the South
paSSionately Republican . Jefferson and his ally James
Madison thought that their Republican party was
a temporary arrangement designed to defeat John
Adams, a Federalist, in his bid to succeed Washington in 1796. (Adams narrowly defeated Jefferson,
who, under the system then in effect, became vice
president because he had the second most electoral
votes.) In 1800 Adams 's bid to succeed himself
intensified party activity even more, but this time
Jefferson won and the Republicans assumed office.
The Federalists feared that Jefferson would dismantle
the Constitution, but Jefferson adopted a conciliatory
posture, saying in his inaugural address that "we are

*The Jefferson ian Republicans were not the party that
today we call Republican . In fact, present-day Democrats
consider Jefferson to be the founder of their party.

201

202

Chapter 9

I~

Political Parties

The maD .... ho L.. fill ed the. meu ure or hill Country'" Gl ory . "
Jl:t· I' ~III O "· .

-~

-=-

~
==

~

~

....

.-

=
•=.

~

=

=
.=

~

..-

~

@I'IIo-

~

==

•

" Tile lJ-Jlioll mltst be PrU('J'ceti,"

I, Samuel lU'K ean.
W Izen Andrew Jackson ran Jar president in 1828, over a
million votes were cast for the first tilll e ill Alllerican Il istory. Tllis po s te l~ frolll tile J 8 3 2 election, was part oj tile
emergellce oj truly lIIa ss politica Lparticipatioll.

a ll Republicans, we are all Federalists."2 It was not
true, of course: the Federalists detested Jeffe rson, a nd
so me were planning to have New Engla nd secede
from the Un ion. But it was good politics, expressive of
the need that every president has to persuade th e
public that, despite partisan politics, the presidency
exists to serve all the people.
So successful were the Republicans that the Federa lists virtually ceased to exist as a party. Jefferson
was reelected in 1804 with almost no opposition;
Madison easily won two terms; James Monroe carried sixteen out of nineteen states in 1816 and was
reelected without opposition in 1820. Political parties had seemingly disappeared , just as Jefferson had
hoped. The weakness of this so-ca lled first party system can be expla ined by the fact that it was the fi rst:
nobody had been born a Federalist or a Republican;
there was no ancestral party loyalty to defend ; the
earliest po li tica l leaders did not think of themselves
as professional politicians; a nd the Federalist pa rty
had such a limi ted sectiona l and class base that it
cou ld not compete effectively in nationa l elections.

The parties that existed in these ea rly years were
essentially sma ll groups of loca l notables. Politi ca l
participation was limited , and nominations for most
loca l offices were arranged rather casually.
Even in this early period, the parties, though they
had very different views on eco nomic po licy and
somewhat different class bases. did not represent
clear, homogeneous economic interests. Farmers in
Virginia were Republicans. but farmers in Delaware
were Federalists: the co mmercial interests of Boston
were firmly Federalist. but commercial leaders in
urban Connecticut were most likely to be Republican.
From the beginning to the present elections
have created heterogeneous coalitions, as Madison
anticipated.

The Jacksonians
Wh at is often called the second party system
emerged around 1824 with Andrew Jackson's first
run for the pres idency and lasted until the Civil War
became inevitab le. Its distinctive feature was th at
political participation became a mass phenomenon.
Fo r one thing, the number of voters to be reached
had become quite large. Only about 365,000 popular votes were cast in 1824. But as a resu lt of laws
th at enlarged the number of people eli gible to vote
a nd of an increase in the popula tion, by 1828 well
over a milli on votes were ta lli ed. By 1840 the figure
was well over 2 milli on. (In England at this time there
were only 650,000 eli gibl e voters. ) In addition, by
1832 pres idential electors were selected by popular
vote in virtually every state. (As late as 1816 electors
were chosen by the sta te legislatures, rather than by
the people, in about half the states.) Presidential politics had become a truly national, genuinely popular
activity; indeed, in many communities election campai gns h ad become the principal public spectacle.
The party system of the Jacksonian era was built
from the bottom up rather than- as during the period of the Founding- from the top down. No change
better illustrates th is transformation than the abandonment of the system of having caucuses composed of members of Congress nominate presidential
cand id ates. The ca ucus system was an effort to unite
the leg islative an d executi ve branches by giving the
former some degree of control over who would have
a cha nce to capture the latter. The ca ucus system
became unpop ul ar when the caucus candidate for
president in 1824 ran third in a field of four in the
genera l electi on. and it was completely discredited

Th e Rise and Decline of the Political Party
that sa me year when Congress denied the presidency
to Jackson, the candid ate with the greatest share of
the popular vote.
To replace the caucus, the party convention was
invented. The first convention in American hi story
was that of the Anti-Masonic party in 1831 ; the Ilrst
convention of a major po litical party was that of the
anti-Jackso n Republicans later that year (it nominated Henry Clay for presid ent). The Democrats held a
convention in 1832 that ratified Jackson 'S nomination for reelection and pi cked Martin Van Buren as
his running ma te. The first co nvention to select a
man who would be elected president and who was
not already the incumbent president was held by the
Democrats in 183 6; it chose Van Buren .
Cons idering the ma ny efforts made in recent years
to curtail or even abolish the national nominating
convention, it is worth remembering that the convention system was first developed in part as a
reform-a way of allowing for some meas ure of local
control over the nominating process. Virtua lly no
other nation adopted this method, just as no other
nation was later to adopt the dlrect primary after the
conve nti on system became the object of criti cism. It
is interesting, but perhaps futil e. to speculate on how
American government would have evolved if the legislative caucus had remained th e method for nominating preSidents.

The Civil war and Sectionalism
Though the party system created in the Jacksonian
period was the first truly nation al system. w ith
Democrats (foll owers of Jackson) and Whigs (opponents of Jackson) fa irly evenly balanced in most
regions , it cou ld not withstand the deep split in opinion created by the agitation over slavery. Both parties
tried, naturally, to straddle the issue, since neither
wanted to divide its followers and thus lose the election to its rival. But slavery and sectionalism were
issues that could not be straddled. The old parties
divided and new ones emerged. The modern Republican party (not the old Democratic-Republi can party
of Thomas Jefferson) began as a third party. As a
result of the Civil War it came to be a major party
(the only third party ever to ga in major-party status)
and to dominate national po litics. with only occasiona l in terruptions. for three-quarters of a century.
Republican control of the White House, and to a
lesser extent of Congress, was in large measure the
result of two events that gave to Republicans a

marked advantage in the competition for the loyalties of voters. The fITst of these was the Civi l War.
This bitter, searing crisis deep ly polarized popular
attitudes . Those wh o supported the Union side
became, for generations. Repub licans; those who
supported the Confed eracy, or who had opposed the
war, became Democrats.
As it turned out, this partisan division was, for a
while, nearly even: though the Republicans usually
won the presidency and the Senate. they often lost
control of the House. There were many northern
Democrats. In 1896, however, another event-the
presidential ca ndidacy of William Jennings Bryanfurther strengthened the Republi can party. Bryan, a
Democrat, alienated many voters in the populous
northeastern states whi le attracting voters in the
South and Midwest. The result was to co nfLrm and
deepen the split in the country, especially North versus South , begun by the Civil War. From 1896 to the
1930s, with rare exceptions northern states were
solidly Republican, southern ones solidly Democratic.
This split had a profound effect on the organization
of political parties, for it meant that most states were
now one-party states. As a result, competition for
office at the state level had to go on within a single
domina nt party (the Republican party in Massachusetts. New York. Pennsylvania, Wisconsin , and elsewhere; the Democratic party in Georgia, Mississippi,
South Carolina, and elsewhere). Conseq uen tly there
emerged two major factions within each party, but
especially within the Republican party. One was composed of the party regulars-the profession al politicians, the "stalwarts," the Old Guard. They were
preoccupied with build ing up the party machinery,
developing party loyalty, and acquiring and dispensin g patronage- jobs and other favors- for themselves and their faithful followers. Their great skills
were in organization, negotiation, bargaining, and
compromise; their great interest was in winning.
The other faction, va riously called mugwumps
or progressives (or "reformers"), was opposed to
the h eavy emphas is on patronage; disliked the party
machinery, because it permitted only bland ca ndidates to rise to the top; was fearful of the heavy influx

mugwumps or progressives

Republican party
faction of the 1890s to the 191 Os, composed of
reformers who opposed patronage .

203

204

Chapter 9

Political Parties

The Election of 1828
ELECTOR AL POPULAR
D

Jackson (0 )

D

178

647,286

D Divided

83

508,064

D

Ad ams (Nat. R.)

Territory (no returns)

At first the mugwumps tri ed to play a balance-ofpower role. sometimes siding with the Republi can
party of which they were members, at other times
defecting to the Democrats (as when they bolted the
Republican party to support Grover Clevela nd , the
Democrati c nominee, in 1884). But later, as the RepUb lican strength in the nation grew, progressives
within that par ty became less and less able to playa
balance-of-power role, especially at the state level.
Wisconsin. Michigan. Ohio, and Iowa were so lidly
Republican; Georgia. the Carolinas. and the rest of
the Old South h ad by 1880 become so heavily Democratic that the Repub lican party in many areas had
virtually ceased to exist. If the progress ives were to
have any power. it wo uld require, they came to
believe, an attack on the very concept of partisanship itself.

The Era of Reform

The Election of 1860
ELECTORAL

POPULAR

180

1,866 ,452

D

Douglas (No. D)

12

1,375, 157

D

D

Breckenridge (So. D)

76

847,953

D

Be ll (Const. Union)

39

590,63 1

D

Linco ln (R)

D

Divi ded
Territory
(no returns)

of immigrants into American cities and of the ability
of the party reg ul a rs to organize them into
"machines": and wanted to see the party take unpopular positions on certa in iss ues (such as free trade).
Their great skills lay in the areas of advocacy and
articulation: their great interest was in principle.

Progressives began to espouse measures to curtail or
even abolish political parties. They favored primary
elections to replace nominating conventions, because
the latter were viewed as being manipulated by party
bosses; they favored nonpartisan elections at the city
level and in some cases at the state level as well: they
argued against corrupt alliances between parties and
businesses. They wanted str ict voter-registration
req uirements that would reduce voting fraud (but
would also, as it turned out. keep ordinary citizens
who found the requirements cumbersome from voting): they pressed for civil service reform to eliminate
patronage; and they made heavy use of the mass
media as a way of attacking the abuses of partisanship
and of promoting their own ideas and candidacies.
The progressives were more successful in some
places than in others. In California. for example, progressives led by Governor Hiram Johnson in 19101911 were able to institute the direct primary and
to adopt procedures-called the initiative and the
referendum- so that citizens could vote directly on
proposed legislation, thereby bypassing the state legislature. Governor Robert La Follette brought about
similar changes in Wisconsin.
The effect of these changes was to reduce substantially the worst forms of po litical corruption a nd
ultimately to make boss rule in politics difficult if not
imposs ibl e. But they also had the effect of making
political parties, whether led by bosses or by statesmen. weaker. less ab le to hold officeholders accountab le. and less able to assemble the power necessary
for governing the fragmented politica l institutions

The Rise and Decline of the Political Party
created by the Constitu tion. In Congress party lines
began to grow fainter, as did the power of congressionalleadership. Above all , the progressives did not
have an answer to the prob lem first fa ced by JefTerson: if there is not a strong poli tica l party, by what
other mea ns will cand idates for offi ce be found,
recruited, and supported ?

The Election of 1896

D
D

ELECTORAL POPULAR
McKinl ey (R)

271

7, 104,77 9

Bryan (0 )

176

6,50 2,92 5

D

D

Div ided
Territory (no return s)

Party Realignments
There have clearly been important turning points in
the strength of the major parties, especially in the
twentieth century, when for long periods we have not
so much had close competition between two parties
as we have had an alternation of dominance by one
party and then the other. To help explain these major
shifts in the tides of po litics, sch olars have developed
the th eory of critical or realigning periods. During such periods a sh arp, lasting shift occurs in the
popular coalition supporting one or both parties. The
issues that separate the two parties change, a nd so
the kinds of voters supporting each party change.
This shift may occur at the time of the election or just
after, as the new adm ini stration draws in new supporters. 3 There seem to have been five rea lign ments
so far, during or just after these elections: 1800
(when the Jeffersonian Republica ns defeated the
Federalists), 1828 (when the Jacksonian Democrats
came to power). 1860 (when the Whig party collapsed a nd the Repub li ca ns under Linco ln came to
power), 1896 (when th e Repub lica ns defeated
William Jennings Bryan). and 1932 (when the
Democrats under Roosevelt came into office).
There are at least two kinds of realignments- one
in which a major party is so badly defeated that it disappears and a new party emerges to take its place
(this happened to the Federalists in 1800 and to the
Whigs in 1856-1860), and another in which the
two existing parties continue but voters shift their
support from one to the other (this happened in
1896 and 1932).
The three clearest cases seem to be 1860, 1896,
and 1932 . By 1860 the existing parties could no
longer stradd le the fence on the slavery issue. The
Republican party was formed in 1856 on the basis of
clear-cut opposition to slavery; the Democratic party
split in half in 1860, with one part (l ed by Stephen A.
Douglas a nd based in the North) try ing to waffle on
the issue and the other (led by John C. Breckinridge
a nd draw ing its support from the South) categorically denying that any government had any right to

205

The Election of 1932

D

F.D. Roosevelt (D)

D

Hoover (R)

ELECTORAL

POPULAR

4 72

22, 82 1,857

59

15,76 1,841

outlaw slavery. The remnants of the Whig pa rty,
renamed the Constitutional Union party, tried to
un ite the nation by writing no platform at all, thus

critical or re<llignment p eriod Periods when
a major, lasting shift occurs in the popular
coalition supporting one or both parties.

206

Chapter 9

Political Parties

remaining silent on slavery. Lincoln and the antislavery Republicans won in 1860; Breckinridge and the
proslavery Southern Democrats came in second.
From that moment on, the two major political parties
acquired different sources of support and stood (at
least for a decade) for different principles. The parties
that had tried to straddle the fence were eliminated.
The Civil War fixed these new party loyalties deep in
the popular mind, and the structure of party competition was set for nearly forty years.
In 1896 a different kind of real ignment occurred.
Economics rather than slavery was at issue. A series
of depressions during the 1880s and 1890s fell especially hard on farmers in the Midwest and parts of
the South. The prices paid to farmers for their commodities had been falling more or less steadily since
the Civil War, making it increasingly difficult for
them to pay their bills. A bitter reaction against the
two major parties. which were straddling this issue
as they had straddled slavery, spread lil<e a prairie
fire. leading to the for mation of parties of economic
protest- the Greenbackers and the Populists. Reinforcing the economic cleavages were cultural ones:
Populists tended to be fundamentalist Protestants;
urban voters were increasingly Catholic. Matters
came to a head in 1896 when William Jennings
Bryan captured the Democratic nomination for president and saw to it that the party adopted a Populist
platform. The existing Populist party endorsed the
Bryan candidacy. In the election an ti-Bryan Democrats deser ted the party in droves to support the
Republican candidate, William McKinley. Once again
a real issue divided the two parties: the Republicans
stood for industr y, business, hard money. protective
tariffs , and urban interests: the Democrats for farmers. small towns, low tariffs, and rural interests. The
Republicans won, carrying the cities, workers and
business people alike; the Democrats lost. carrying
most of the southern and midwestern farm states.
The old split between orth and South that resulted
from the Civil War was now replaced in part by an
East versus West. city versus farm split. 4 It was not,
however, only an economic cleavage- the Republicans had been able to appeal to Catholics and Lutherans. who disliked fundamentalism and its hostility
toward liquor and immigrants.
This alignment persisted until 1932. Again
change was triggered by an economic depression;
again more than economic issues were involved. The

ew Deal coalition that emerged was based on bringing together into the Democratic party urban workers. northern blacks. southern whites, and Jewish
voters. Unlike in 1860 and 1896. it was not preceded by any third-party movement; it occurred suddenly (though some groups had begun to shift
their allegiance in 1928) and gathered momentum throughout the 19 30s. The Democrats, isolated
since 1896 as a southern and midwestern sectional
party, had now become the majority party by finding
a candidate and a cause that could lure ur ban workers. blacks, and Jews away from the Republican
party, where they had been for decades. It was obviously a delicate coalition-blacks and southern
whites disagreed on practically everything except
their liking for Roosevelt; Jews and the Irish bosses of
the big-city machines also had little in common. But
the federal government under Roosevelt was able to
supply enough benefits to each of these disparate
groups to keep them loyal members of the coalition
and to provide a new basis for party identification.
These critical elections may have involved not
converting existing voters to new party loyalties but
recruiting into the dominant party new votersyoung people just coming of voting age, immigrants
just receiving their citizenship papers, and blacks
just receiving. in some places, the righ t to vote. But
there were also genuine conversions- northern
blacks. for example. had been heavily Republican
before Roosevelt but became heavily Democratic
after his election.
In short, an electoral realignment occurs when a
new issue of utmost importance to the voters (slavery. the economy) cuts across existing party divisions
and replaces old issues that were formerly the basis of
party identification.
Some people wondered whether the election of
1980, since it brought into power the most conservative administration in half a century, signaled a
new realignment. Many of President Reagan's supporters began talking of their having a "mandate" to
adopt major new policies in keeping with the views of
the "new majority. " But Reagan won in 1980 less
because of what he stood for than because he was
notJimmy Carter, and he was reelected in 1984 primarily because people were satisfied with how the
country was doing, especially economically. 5
Just because we have had periods of one-party
dominance in the past does not mean that we will

The National Party Structure Today
have them in the future. Reaga n's election could not
have been a traditional realignmen t. because it left
Congress in the h ands of the Democratic par ty.
Moreover. some sch olars are beginnin g to question
the theory of critical elections. or at least the theory
that they occur with some regul arity.
Never theless, one major change has occur red of
late-the shift in the presidential votin g patterns of
the Sou th. From 1972 throu gh 2004 the Sou th was
more Republican than the nation as a whole. The
propor tion of white so uthern ers describin g themselves to pollsters as "strongly Democratic" fell from
more than one-third in 1952 to about one-seventh in
1984. There has been a corresponding in crease in
"independents." As it turn s out. southern white
ind ependents have voted overwhelmingly Republica n in recen t presid ential elections. 6 If you lump
independents together with the parties for which
they actua lly vote, the party alignment amon g white
southerners has gone fro m six-to-one Democratic in
1952 to abou t fifty-fifty Democrats and Republica ns.
If this continues, it will constitute a major rea lignment in a region of the countr y that is growing rapidly in population and political clou t.
In general. however, the kind of dra matic rea lignment that occurred in the 1860s or after 1932 may
not occur again, because party labels have lost their
meaning for a growing number of voters. For these
people politics may dealign rather than realign.

Party Decline
The evidence that the parties a re decayin g. not
realigning. is of severa l sorts. We have already noted
that the proportion of people iden tifyin g with one or
the other party declined between 1960 a nd 19 80.
Simul ta neously. the proportion of those voting a split
ticket (as opposed to a straight ticket) increased.
Figure 9.2. for exa mple, shows the steep increase in
the percentage of congressional districts carried by
one par ty for the presidency a nd by the other for Congress. Whereas in the 1940s one party would carry a
given district for both its preSidential and congressional candid ates, today about a fifth of the districts
split their votes between one party's presidential ca ndid ate and the other's con gressiona l ca nd idate.
In 1988 more than half of all House Democrats
were elected in districts that voted for Repu blica n
George Bush as president. Thi s ticket spli tting was
greatest in the Sou th. but it was comm on everywhere. If every district that voted for Bush had also

elected a Republican to Con gress, the Republica n
party would have held a two-to-one majority in the
House of Represen tatives. Ticket splittin g creates
divided government- the White House a nd Congress
are co ntro ll ed by different par ties (see Chapter 14).
Ticket splitting helped the Democrats keep co ntrol of
the House of Representatives from 1954 to 1994.
Ticket splitting was almost unhea rd-of in the nineteenth cen tury. a nd for a very good reason. In those
days the voter was either given a ballot by the party of
his choice and he dropped it. intact. in to th e ba llot box
(thereby votin g for everybody listed on the ballot). or
he was given a government-prin ted ballot that listed
in columns all th e candid ates of each party. All the
voter had to do was mark the top of one column in
order to vote for every ca ndidate in that column .
(When voting machines ca me along, they provided a
single lever that. when pulled. cast votes for all the
cand id ates of a particul ar party.) Progressives around
the turn of the century began to persu ade states to
adopt the office-bloc (or "Massachusetts") ballot in
place of the party-column (or "India na") ballot.
The offi ce-bl oc ballot lists all cand idates by office:
there is no way to vote a straight party ticket by ma kin g one marie Not surprisingly, states usin g the offi cebloc ballot show much more ticket splittin g tha n
those withou t it. 7

The National Party Structure
Today
It wou ld be a mistake. however. to conclude th at par-

ties have decl ined simply beca use ma ny voters now
split tickets in nationa l elections. Despite many
changes a nd challenges (see Figu re 9 .3). America's

split ticket Voting for candidates of different
parties for various offices in the same election .
straight ticket Voting for candidates who are
all of the same party.
office-bloc ballot A ballot listing all candidates of a given office under the name of
that office; also called a "Massachusetts"
ballot.
party-column ballot A ballot listing all candidates of a given party together under the
name of that party; also called an "Indiana "
ballot.

207

208

Chapter 9

Figure 9.2

Political Pa rties

Trends in Split-Ticket Voting for President and
Congress, 1920-2000

50
45
VI

a:; 40

-'"
u

~

35

c.
VI

'0

30

<J)

25

'"
C

20

"

15

on

<J)
<J)

C>-

10
5

1920 1928 1936 1944 1952 1960 1968 1976 1984 1992 2000

Note. The figure is the percentage of congressional distri cts carried by
presidential and congressional candidates of di fferent parti es in each
election yea r.

two-party system remains strong. In most elections-national, state, and loca l- voters registered
as Democrats still vote for Democratic ca ndidates,
and voters registered as Repub li ca ns still vote for
Repub lican candidates. In Congress. state legislatures, and city councils, members sti ll normally vote
a long party lines. Local po litical machines have died,
bui, as we shall now explain, national party structures remain alive and well.
Since political parties ex ist at the national , state,
and local levels, you might suppose that they are
arranged like a big corporation, with a national
board of directors giv ing orders to state managers,
who in turn direct the activities of rank-and-file
workers at the co unty a nd city level.
A meeting of party delegates held every four years.
national committee Delegates who run party
affairs between national conventions.
congressional campaign committee A party
committee in Congress that provides funds to
members and would-be members.
national chairman Day-to-day pa rty manager
elected by the national committee.

national convention

othing could be further from the truth. At each
level a separate and almost entirely ind ependent
organization exists that does pretty much what it
wants, and in many counties and cities there is virtua lly no organization at a ll.
On paper the nation al Democratic and Repub lican
parties look quite similar. In both pa rties ul timate
a uthority is in the hands of the national convention that meets every four years to nominate a presidenti a l ca ndidate. Between these conventions party
affair s are managed by a national committee,
made up of delegates from each state and territory.
In Congress each party has a congressional campaign committee that helps members of Congress
who a re ru nning for reelection or would-be members
running for a n open seat or cha ll enging a candidate
from the opposition party. The day-to-day work of
the pa rty is managed by a fu ll -time, paid national
chairman , who is elected by the committee.
For a long time the two nationa l parties were alike
in behavior as well as description . The national
cha irman , if his party held the White House, would
help decide who among the party faithfu l would get
federa l jobs. Otherwise the parties did very little.
But beginning in th e late 1960s and early 19 70s,
the Republican s began to convert their national
party into a well-financed, h ighly staffed organization devoted to finding and electing Republican candidates, especially to Con gress. At about the same
time, the Democrats began changing the rules govern ing how presidential candidates are nominated
in ways that profoundly a ltered the distribution of
power within the party. As a consequence the Repub lica ns beca me a burea ucratized party and the
Democrats became a factiona lized one. After the
Republicans won four out of five presidential elections from 1968 to 1984 and briefly took control of
the Senate, the Democrats bega n to suspect that
maybe an efficient bureaucracy was better than a
collection of warring factions, and so they made an
effor t to emulate the Republica ns.
What the Repub licans had done was to take
advantage of a new bit of technology- computerized ma ilings. They built up a huge rue of names of
people who had given or mi ght give money to the
party, usua lly in sma ll amounts, a nd used that list to
raise a big budget for th e national party. The RNC
used this money to run, in effect, a national political
consulting firm . Money went to recrui t and train

The National Party Structure Today
Republican candidates. give them legal and financial
advice, study issues and ana lyze voting trends, and
conduct nation al advertising campaigns on behalf of
the par ty as a wh ole.
When the Democratic Nationa l Committee (D C)
decided to pl ay catch-up. it foll owed the RNC strategy. Using the same computerized direct-mail technigues, the Democratic party co mmi ttees- the
National Committee, Senatorial Committee, a nd
Congressional Committee- raised more money than
they had ever raised before, thoug h not as much as
the Republica ns. In 2004 the Democrats and their
allies outspent the Republicans. The Democrats. like
the Republicans, ship a lot of their national par ty
money to state organizations to fina nce television
ads supporting their parties.
Despite the recent enactment of cam paign
finance laws in tend ed to check the influence of
money on n ational elections, in 2004 both Democrats and Republicans redoubled efforts to raise what
is called soft money-that is. fund s to aid pa rties
(a nd their ads a nd polls). In the Democrat presidential primary, Howard Dean alon e raised $ 30 million over the Internet with average co ntribution s
und er $100.

National Conventions
The national committee selects the time and place of
the next national convention and issues a "call " for
the co nven tion that sets forth the number of delegates each state and territory is to have and also th e
rules under which delegates must be chosen . The
number of delegates and their manner of selection
can significantly influence the cha nces of various
preSidential ca ndidates. and considerable attention is
thus devoted to these matters. In the Democratic
party. for example, a long stru gg le took place
between those who w ished to see southern states
receive a large share of delegates to the convention.
in recognition of their firm support of Democratic
ca ndidates in presidentia l elections, and those who
preferred to see a larger share of delegates allotted to
northern and western states, which . though less
solidly Democratic, were larger or more libera l. A
simil ar conflict within the Republican party h as pitted conservative Republican leaders in the Mid west
against libera l ones in the East.
A compromise formula is usua lly ch osen; nevertheless, over the years these formu las h ave gradu ally
changed, shifting voting strength in th e Democratic

Figure 9.3

209

Cleavages and Continuity in the Two-Party
System

1787
1789
1792
1796
1800
1804
1808
1812
1816
1820
1824
1828
1832
1836
1840
1844
1848
1852

Federalist s
(no organ ized parti es)

Ant ifederalists
(no organ ized parties)

Federa l ist s

Democratic-Republicans

1

1

Nat ional Republica ns

Democrats

Whi gs

Republ ican s

J

Wh igs

Southern
Constit utiona l
1856
--- - -ica
- ns
-- ---_
- Democ
1860 - Republ
_ _rats
_........Democrats
____.0--1Uni
_onists
_ __
1864

- - - --11-- - -- - - - -- - - - -- - - - Democ rat s

1868
1872
1876
1880
1884
1888
1892
1896
1900
1904

J
National
Democ rats

Bryan
Democ rat s

----~r------~---.------~--- - --1- - - - - -- -- - - - -- - - - -

Democrats
Bull Moose
1908
Republ icans
Progressive
1912 ~-----~. .- -.-- - - - -__f- - - - - - 19 16 - - -- - - - -- -- - - - - -__f- -- - - - 1920
Republica ns
1924

1928
1932
1936
1940
1944
1948
1952
1956
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992

Henry Wallace
Progressives

States ' Rights
Democrats

Democrats
George Wa ll ace
Democrat s·
Democrats
Democrat s

John And erson
Independents

Ross Perot
1996
In de pendentsb
2000 - -- -- - - - --------Ralph Nader, Pat Buc hanan
Ind epend ents
aAmeri ca n Independ ent party.
bUnited We Stand America or Reform Party.

Chapter 9

210

...

... l.-.tiooo

:\

~.....

~

AIMil ''''-...........,.."

....

........

Political Parties

Si

""'-

~~

DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMH ITIEE

~

111~ Pot
oemocrots
Stond of
Agotnst
1 tlcl z otlon
War and
Homeland Securl ty

$>tnoto IIoJ_1tv l.oa.1" 1M Daachl. 0I\d othe ..
o.MCrOU fought bod. O90 1 ,.~t Geeu.o! lOtI' r,....
p,.o.iden\ Bu.h ond other priI"n.n1 Jt.publ l cons thot tMy or. "not
inte""'ed In tho "c\,Irlty of t!'le ",",. Icon "0«)1.," In the 110" f ••
.. ,k., Suth on<! In. GOP
b"n u.lng ,I'I<t "" on """or ' ''' and tho

I'll'''''

I,"

,No.ot of oIII\O,.V oct
In Ir~ In 0" altUPI to ereot. 0 po li t i col
odYOI'Itcag" ond O..oeral, helv. duond.d that RePlolblleon, 'lOCI
POlltlc l t l ng (:l" l l lcol I,we. of .or OI'Id ",ou.

UAD l oaE ..

HEADLINE S
_ AI,lng Une-olow,enl. COI"porGh
Scot*l. nor" But-h [cono.ic
R,cord

The lntem et is the latest lI1eans through whicl! people are becoming politically inJormed and active. It has also becoll1e an important way to raise lI10ney Jar candidates and parties.

convention away from the South and toward the
North and West a nd in the Republican convention
away from the East and toward the SouLh and Southwest. These delegate allocation formula s are but one
sign (others will be mentioned later in this chapter)
of the tendency of the two pa rties' co nventions to
move in opposite ideol ogical directions-Democrats
more to Lhe left , Republicans more to the right.
The exact formula for apportioning delegates is
extremely complex. For the Democrats it takes inLo
account the vote each state cast for Democratic candidates in past elections and the number of electoral
votes of each state; for the Republica ns it takes into
account the number of representaLives in Congress
and whether the state in past elections cast its electoral votes for the Repub lican presidenti al candidate
and elected Republi cans to the Senate, the House,
and the governorship. Thus the Democrats give extra
delegates to large states, while the Republican s give
extra ones to loyal states.
The way in which delegates are chosen can be
even more important than their a ll ocation. The
DemocraLs, beginning in 1972 , have developed an
elaborate set of rules designed to wea ken the control
over delegates by local party leaders a nd to in crease
the proportion of women, young people, Africa n
Amer icans, and Native Americans attending the
convention. These rules were fir st drafted by a party
commi ssion chaired by Senator George McGovern
(who was later to make skillful use of these new pro-

cedures in hi s successful bid for the Democratic presidential nomination). They were revised in 1974 by
another commission. chaired by Barbara Mikulski,
whose decisions were raLilled by the 1974 midterm
convention . After the 1976 election yet a third commission , chaired by Morley Winograd, produced sti ll
another rev ision of the rules, which took effect in
1980. Then a fourth commission, chaired by North
Carolina governor James B. Hunt, recommended in
1981 yet a not her set of rules, which became effective with the 1984 convention.
The general thrust of the work of the first three
rules co mmiss ions was to broaden the antiparty
changes started by the progressives at the beginnin g
of this century. Whereas the earlier reformers had
tried to minimize the role of parties in the election
process, those of the 19 70s sought to weaken the
influ ence of leaders within the party. In short, the
newer reform s were aimed at creating in trapar ty
democracy as well as interparty democracy. This was
done by ru les that, for the 1980 convention, required:
• Equal division of delegates between men and
women
• Establishment of "goals" for the representation of
Africa n America ns, Hispanics, and other groups
in proportion to their presence in a state's Democratic electorate
• Open delegate selection procedures, with adva nce
publicity and written rules
• Selection of 75 percent of the delegates at the
level of the co ngress ional district or lower
• No "unit rule" that would require all delegates to
voLe with the majority of their state delegation
• Restrictions on the number of party leaders and
elecLed officials who could vote at the convention
• A requirement that all delegates pledged to a ca ndid ate vote for that candid ate
In 1981 the HunL Commission changed some of
these rul es- in particular, the lasL two- in order to
increase the inf1uence of elected officials a nd to make
the convention a somewhat more deliberative body.
The commission reser ved about 14 percent of the
delegate seats for pa rty leaders a nd elected officials,
who would not h ave to commit themselves in
adva nce to a presidenLial candidate, a nd it repealed
the rule requiring that delegates pledged to a ca ndidate vote for that candidate.
Rules have consequ ences. Walter Mondale was
the chief beneficiary of the delegate selection rules.

The National Party Structure Today

National party conventions no longer make important decisions, but they generate enthusiasm as among Republicans who unanimously nominated George W Bush ill 2004.
He won the support of the overwhelming majority of
elected offi cials- the so-ca lled superdelegatesa nd he did especially well in those states that held
winner-take-a ll primaries.
But the "reform" of the parties, especially the
Democratic pa rty, has had far more profound co nseq uences than merely helping one ca ndidate or
another. Before 1968 the Republican party represented, essentially, white-collar voters and the Democratic party represented blue-collar ones. After a
decade of "reform " the Republican and the Democratic parties each represented two ideologically different sets of upper-middle-class voters (see Table
9.1 ). In the terminology of Chapter 7, the Republicans came to represent the more conservative wing
of th e traditional middle class and the Democrats the
more leftist wing of the liberal midd le cl ass.
This was more troubling to the Democrats than to
the Repu blicans, because the traditiona l middle class
is somewhat closer to the opinions of most citizens
than is the li beral mi dd le class (and thus the Republican national conventio n more close ly refl ected public opini on than did the Democratic nationa l
convention). And for whatever reason, the Repub licans won fi ve out of six pres identia l ra ces between
1968 a nd 1988.
Before th e 1988 co nvention the Democrats took a
long. hard look at their party procedures. Under the

leadership of DNC cha irman Pa ul Kirk, they decided
aga inst making a ny major cha nges. especia lly ones
that wou ld increase the power of grassroots activists
at the expense of elected offi cials an d party leaders.
The number of such officials (or superdelcgates) to
be given delegate seats was increased. For exa mple,
80 percent of the Democratic members of Co ngress
and all Democratic governors were automatica lly
made convention delegates in 1988. The official status of some special-interest ca ucuses (such as those
organized to represent Africa n Americans, homosexuals, and various ethnic groups) was reduced in
order to lessen the perception th at the Democrats
were sim ply a party of factions.
The surface harmony was a bit misleading, however, as some activists, notably supporters of Jesse
Jackson , protested that the rules made it harder for
candidates like Jackson to win delegates in proportion to their share of the primary vote. (In 1984
Jackson got 18 percent of the primary vote but only
12 percent of the delegates.) The DNC responded by

sllperdelegates

Party lead ers and elected officials who become delegates to the national
convention without having to run in primaries
o r cau cuses.

211

212

Chapter 9

Political Parties

Table 9.1

T · H-I · V· I ·A
.......................

Who Are the Party Delegates?

Characteristics of delegates to Democratic and Republican
national conventions in 2004.

Political Parties

Democrats

First national political
convention

Anti -Masonic party, 1831, in
Baltimore

First-time incumbent
governors were nominated
for president

Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio,
by Republicans in 1876
Samuel J. Tilden of New York,
by Democrats in 1876

Sex and Race
Wom en
Blacks
Religion
Protestant
Catholic
Jewish

First African American to
receive a vote at a national
party convention

Frederick Douglass, at
Republican convention in
1888

Education
College degree and
beyond
Post graduate

First year in which women
attended conventions as
delegates

1900 (one woman at both
Democratic and Republican
conventions)

Most ballots needed to choose
a presidential nominee

103, by Democrats in 1924
to select John W. Davis

Closest vote in
convention history

543 %.. to 542 7/, .. , defeating
a motion to condemn the
Ku Klux Klan at 1924
Democratic convention

First Catholic nominated for
president by a major party

AI Smith, by Democrats in
1928

Only person nominated for
president four times by a
major political party

Franklin D. Roosevelt, by
Democrats in 1932, 1936,
1940, and 1944

First presidential nominee to
make an acceptance speech
at the party convention

Franklin D. Roosevelt

chan ging the rules for the 199 2 campaign. Former
DNC chairman Ronald H. Brown (later President
Clinton's secretary of commerce) won approval for
three important requirements:
• The winner-reward systems of delegate distribution, which gave the winn er of a primary or caucus extra delegates. were banned. (In 19 88 fifteen
states used winn er-reward systems. including
such vote-rich states as Florida. Illinois, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania.)

Republicans

50%
18

43 %
6

43
32

65

8
77

73

53

44

Family Income
Under $50,000
$100,000 and over

15
42

44

Belong to union

25

8

8

Born-again Christian

13

33

Gun owner in household

22

45

Sources: New York Times (August 29. 2004); CBSNEWS.COM.
July 24. 2004; Boston Globe, August 31. 2004.

• The proportional representation system was put
into use. Thi s system divides a state's publicly
elected delegates among candidates who receive
at least 15 percent of the vote.
• States that violate the rules are now penalized
with the loss of 25 percent of their national convention delegates.
Even though the Democrats have retreated a bit
from the reforms of the 1960s and 1970s. the conventions of both parties have changed fundamentally. and probably permanently. Delegates once selected
by party leaders are now chosen by primary elections
and grassroots caucuses. As a result the national
party co nventions are no longer places where party
leaders meet to bargain over the selection of their
pres id entia l candid a tes; th ey are instead places
wh ere delegates come togeth er to ratify choices
already made by party activists and primary voters.
Most Ameri can s disli ke bosses. deals. and manipul ation a nd prefer democra cy. reform . a nd openness.
These are co mmendable instincts. But such in-

State and Local Parties
stincts. unless carefully tested against practice. may
mislead us into supposing that anything ca rried out
in the name of refor m is a good id ea. Ru les mu st be
judged by their practical results as well as by their
conformity to some principle of fair ness. Rul es affect
the distribu tion of power: they help so me people win
and others lose. Later in this cha pter we shall try to
assess delegate selection rules by looking more closely at how they affect who attends conventions and
which pres idential cand idates are selected there.

*

State and Local Parties

While the national pa rty structures have changed.
the grassroots orga n izalions have withered. In
between. state par ty systems have struggled to redefine their roles.
In every state there is a Democratic and a Republican state party orga nized under state law. Typically
each consists of a state central committee. below
which are found coun ty committees and sometimes
city. town . or even precinct committees. The members
of these committees are chosen in a variety of wayssometimes in primary elections. sometimes by conventions. sometimes by a building-block process
whereby people elected to ser ve on precinct or town
committees choose the members of county commi ttees. who in turn choose state committee members.
Knowing these for mal arrangements is much less
helpfu l than kn owing the actual distribution of power
in each state party. In a few places strong party bosses handpick the members of these conunittees; in
other places powerfu l elected officials-key state legislators. county sheriffs. or judges- control the committees. And in many places no one is in charge. so
that either the party structure is lar gely meaningless
or it is made up of the representa tives of various local
factions.
To understa nd how power is distributed in a
party, we mu st first know what incentives motivate
people in a particular state or locality to become
active in a party organization. Different incentives
lead to different ways of organizing parties.

The Machine
A political machine is a party organization that
recruits its members by the use of tangible incentives-money. political jobs. an opportunity to get
favors from government-and that is characterized

by a high degree of leadership control over member
activity. At one time many loca l party organi zations
were machines. and the struggle over political jobspatronage-was the chief concer n of their members.
Though Tammany Hall in New York City bega n as a
caucus of well-to-do notables in the local Democratic party. by the late nineteenth century it had become
a machine organized on the basis of political clubs in
each assemb ly district. These clubs were composed of
pa r ty workers whose job it was to get out the straight
party vote in their election districts and who hoped
for a tangible reward if they were successful.
And there were abundant rewards to hope for.
During the 1870s it was estimated that one out of
every eight voters in ew York City had a federal .
state. or city job. S The federal bureaucracy wa s one
important so urce of those jobs. The New York Customhouse alone empl oyed thousa nd s of people. virtually all of whom were replaced if their party lost
the presidential election. The postal system was
another source, and it was frankly recognized as
such. When James N. Tyner beca me postmaster general in 1876. he was "a ppointed not to see that the
mails were carried. but to see that Indiana was ca rried. "9 Elections and co nventions were so [requen t
and the intensity of party competition so great that
being a party worker was [or many a full-time paid
occupation.
Well before the arrival of vast numbers of poo r
immigrants from Ireland. Italy. and elsewhere. oldstock Americans had perfected the machine. run up
the cost o[ government. and systematized voting
fraud . Kickbacks on co ntracts. payments extracted
from omceholders. and funds raised from business
people made some politicians rich but also paid the
huge bills of the elaborate party organization . When
the immigrants began flooding the eastern cities. the
party machines were there to provide them with all
manner o[ services in exchange [or their support at
the polls: the machines were a vast welfare organization operating before the creation of the welfare
state.
The abuses of the machine were well know n and
gradually curtailed. Stricter voter registrati on laws
reduced fraud, civil ser vice reforms cut dow n the

political machine

A party organizat ion th at
rec ruits members by dispensing patronag e.

213

214

Chapter 9

Political Parties

Ex-senator George Washington Plunkitt of Tammany Hall explains machine politics Jrom atop
the bootblack stand in Jro nt oj th e New York Co un ty Co urthoLise around 1905.

number of patronage jobs, and competitive-bidding
laws made it harder to award overpriced contracts to
favored businesses. The Hatch Act (passed by Co ngress in 19 39) made it illegal for federal civil service
employees to take an active part in political management or political ca mpaigns by serv in g as party officers, soliciting campaign fund s, running for partisan
office, working in a partisan ca mpa ign. end orsing
partisan ca ndidates. takin g voters to the polls. counting ballots, circulatin g nominating petitions, or
being delegates to a party convention. (They may still
vote and make campa ign contributions.)
These restrictions gradu a lly took federa l employees out of machin e politics. but they did not end the
machines. In many cities- Chicago, Philadelphia .
and Albany- ways were found to maintain the
mac hines even though city employees were technically under the civil service. Far more important
than the various progressive reforms that wea kened
the machines were changes among voters. As voters
grew in education, income. a nd sophistication, they
depended less and less on the advice and leaders hip
of local party officials. And as the federa l government created a bureaucratic welfare system. the parties ' welfare systems declined in va lu e.
It is easy either to scorn the poli ti ca l party
machine as a venal and sel f-serv in g organization or

to roma nticize it as an informal welfare system . In
truth it was a little of both. Above all it was a frank
recognition of the fact that politics requ ires organization; the machine was the supreme expression of
the value of organization. Even a llowin g for voti ng
fraud . in elections where party machines were active,
voter turnout was hu ge: more people participated in
politics when mobilized by a party ma chine than
when appealed to by television or good-government
associations. 10 Moreover. beca use the party machines were interested in winning, they would subordinate any other cons idera tion to that end. This
ha s meant that the machines were usually willing to
support the presidential candidate with the best
chance of w inning. regardless of his policy views
(prov ided, of course. that he was not determined to
wreck the machines once in office). Republican
machin es helped elect Abraham Lincoln as well as
Warren G. Harding; Democratic machines were of
cru cial importa nce in electing Franklin D. Roosevelt
and John F. Kennedy.
The old-style machine is almost extinct, though
important exa mples still can be found in the Democratic organization in Cook Co unty (Chi cago) and
the Republican organization in Nassau Coun ty (New
York) . But a new-style ma chine has emerged in a few
pl aces. It is a machine in the sense that it uses money

State and Local Parties
to knit together many politicians. but it is new in that
the money comes not from patronage and contracts
but from campaign contributions supplied by
wealthy individuals and the proceeds of direct-mail
ca mpaigns.
The political organization headed by Democratic
co ngressmen Henry A. Waxman and Howa rd L.
Berman on the west side of Los Angeles is one such
new-sty le ma chine. By the astute use of campaign
fund s. the "Waxman-Berman organization" builds
loya lties to it among a variety of elected officia ls at all
levels of government. Moreover. this new-style
machin e. unlike the old ones. has a strong interest in
issues, especially at the n ationa l level. In this sense it
is not a machine at all, but a cross between a
machine a nd an id eologica l party.

Ideological Parties
At the opposite extreme from the machine is the ideological party. Where the machine va lues winning
above all else. the ideologica l party va lues principle
above all else. Where the former depends on mon ey
in centives. the latter spurns them. Where the former
is hi erarchica l and disci plined. the latter is usually
contentiou s a nd factionalized.
The most firmly ideo log ica l parties have been
ind ependent "third parties," such as the Socialist,
Socialist Workers, Libertarian, and Right-to-Li fe parties. But there have been ideologica l factions within
the Democratic and Repub lica n parties as well . and
in some places these ideologica l groups have taken
over the regular parties.
In the 19 50s and 1960s these ideo logica l groups
were "reform clubs" within loca l Democratic and
Republican parties. In Los Angeles, ew York. and
ma ny parts of Wisconsin and Minnesota, issueoriented activists fought to take over the party from
election-oriented regulars. Democratic reform clubs
man aged to defeat the head of Tammany Hall in
Manhattan; similar activist groups became the domin ant force in Ca lifornia state politics.] 1 Democratic
club leaders were more libera l than ra nk-and-file
Democrats. a nd Republi ca n club leaders were often
more conservative than rank-and-fil e Republica ns.
The 19 60s and 1970s saw these "reform " movements replaced by more focused social movements.
The "reform" movement was based on a generalized
sense of liberalism (among Democrats) or co nservatism (a mong Republicans). With the advent of
socia l movements concerned with civil rights. peace.

feminism. environmentalism. libertarianism. and
abortion. the generalized ideology of the clubs was replaced by the specific ideological demands of singleissue activists.
The result is that in many places the party h as
become a coll ection of people drawn from various
social movements. For a ca ndidate to win the party's
support. he or she often has to satisfy the "litmus
test" demands of the ideo logical activists in the party.
Democratic senator Barbara Mikulski put it this way:
"The social movements are now our farm clubs."
With social movements as their farm clubs, the
big-league teams-the Democrats a nd Republicans
at the state level- behave very differently than they
did when political machines were the farm clubs.
Internal factionalism is more intense, and the freedom of action of the party leader (say, the chairperson of the state committee) has been greatly redu ced.
A leader who demands too little or gives up too
much. or who says the wrong thing on a key issue. is
quickly accused of having "sold out. " Under th ese
circumstances many "leaders" are that in name only.

Solidary Groups
Many people who partiCipate in state and local politics do so not in order to earn money or vind icate
some cause. but simply because they find it fun. They
enjoy the ga me, they meet interesting people, and
they like the sense of being "in the know" and rubbing shoulders with the powerfu l. When peopl e get
together out of gregarious or game-loving instincts,
we say that they are responding to solidary incentives; if they form an organization. it is a solidary
association.
Some of these associations were once machines.
When a machine loses its patronage. some of its
members- especia lly the older ones-may continue
to serve in the organization out of a desire for ca maraderie. In other cases precinct, ward . and district
committees are built up on the basis of friendship
networks. One study of politica l activists in Detroit
found that most of them mentioned friendships and

ideological party

A party that values principled stands on issues above all else.
solidary incentives The social rewards (sense
of pleasure. status, or companionship) that
lead people to join political organizations .

215

216

Chapter 9

Political Parties

The personal following of former President George Bus"
was passed on to his sons, George W. (left) and Jeb (right),
both of whom became governors of large states, and the
form er of whom is now president.

a liking for politics, rather than an interest in issues,
as their reasons for joining the party organization. 1 2
Members of ward and town organizations in St.
Louis County gave the same answers when asked
why they joined.1 3 Since patronage h as declined in
value and since the appeals of ideology are limited to
a minority of citizens, the motivations for participating in politics have become very much like th ose for
joining a bowling league or a bridge club.
The advan tage of such groups is that they are neither corrupt nor inflexible; the disadvantage is that
they often do not work very hard. Knockin g on doors
on a rainy November evening to try to talk people
into voting for your candid ate is a chore under the
best of circumstances; it is especially unappealing if
you joined the party primarily because you like to
attend meetings or drink coffee with your friends.] 4

Sponsored Parties
Sometimes a relatively strong party organization can
be created among volunteers w ithout heavy reliance
on money or ideology and without depending entirely on people's finding the work fun. This type of
sponsored party

A local or state political
party that is largely supported by another
organization in the community.
personal following The political support provided to a candidate on the basis of personal
popularity and networks.

sponsored party occurs when another organization exists in the community that can create, or at
least sponsor. a local party structure. The clearest
example of this is the Democratic party in and
around Detro it, which has been developed, led, and
to a degree financed by the politica l-action arm of
the United Auto Workers union . The UAW has had a
long tradition of rank-and-file activism, stemming
from its formative struggles in the 1930s, and since
the city is virtu ally a one-industry town , it was not
hard to transfer some of this activism from union
organizing to voter organizing.
By the mid-1950s union members and leaders
mad e up over three-fourths of all th e Democratic
par ty district leaders within the city. 1 5 On election
day union funds were available for paying workers to
canvass voters; between elections political work on
an unpaid basis was expected of union leaders.
Though the UAW-Democratic party a lli ance in
Detroit has not always been successful in city elections (the city is nonpartisan), it has been quite successful in carrying the city for the Democratic party
in state a nd nation al elections.
Not many areas have organizations as effective or
as dominant as the UAW that can bolster, sponsor, or
even take over the weak formal party structure. Thus
sponsored local par ties are not common in the United States.

Personal Following
Beca use most candidates can no longer count on the
backing of a machine, beca use sponsored par ties are
limited to a few unionized areas, and because so lidary groups are not always productive, a person
wanting to get elected will often try to form a personal following th at will work for him or her during a campaign and then disband until the next
election rolls around . Sometimes a candid ate tries to
meld a personal foll ow ing w ith an ideological group,
especially during the primary election campaign,
when cand id ates need the kind of financial backing
and h ard work th at only highly motivated activists
are likely to supply.
To form a person al following, the candidate must
have an appea li ng person ality, a lot of friend s, or a
big bank acco unt. The Kennedy family has all three,
and the electoral success of the personal followings
of John F. Kennedy, Edward M. Kennedy, Robert
Kennedy, and Joseph P. Kennedy II are legendary.
Presid ent George H.W. Bus h also established su ch a

Th e Two-Party System

following. After he left office, one so n (Jeb) became
governor of Florid a a nd a nother one (Geo rge w. )
beca me governor of Texas a nd for ty-third pres ident
of the United States.
Southern po liticians who have to operate in oneparty states with few. if a ny, machin es have become
grand masters at building personal fo llowings, such
as those of the Talmadge fa mily in Georgia, the Long
fa mi ly in Louisiana, a nd the Byrd fa mily in Virginia.
But the strategy is increasingly followed wherever
pa rty organization is weak. The key asset is to have a
known political name. That has h elped the electoral
victories of th e son of Hubert Humphrey in Minnesota, the so n and daughter of Pat Brown in California, the so n of Birch Bay h in Indiana, the son of
George Wallace in Alabama, and the son and grandson of Robert La Follette in Wisconsin.
The traditional party organization- one that is
hierarchical. lastin g. based on material incentives,
a nd ca pable of influencing who gets nominated for
offi ce-exists today, according to political scientist
David Mayhew, in on ly about eight states, mostly the
older states of the ortheast. Another five states, he
fee ls, have faction-ridden versions of the traditional
pa rty organization.1° The states in the rest of th e
coun try display the wea k pa rty system of so lid ary
clubs, personal fo ll owin gs , ideolog ica l groups, and
sponsored parties. What that mea ns can be seen in
the composition of Democratic national conventions. More than half of the delegates have been
drawn from the ranks of the AFL-CIO, the National
Education Association, and the National Organization for Women. 17

"*

The Two-Party System

With so many different varieties of local party orga nizations (or nonorganizations), and with such a great
range of opinion found within each party, it is
remarkable that we have had only two major political par ties for most of our hi story. In the world at
large a two-party system is a rarity; by one estimate
only fifteen nations have one.1 8 Most European
democrac ies are multiparty systems. We have only
two pa rties with any cha nce of winning nationally,
a nd these pa rties have been , over time, rather evenly
balanced- between 1888 a nd 20 00, the Repub licans wo n sixteen presiden tia l elections a nd th e
Democrats thirteen. Furthermore, when ever one

party has achieved a temporary ascend ancy a nd its
ri val h as been pronounced dead (as were the Democrats in the fir st thlrd of this century a nd the Repu blicans durin g the 1930s a nd the 19 60s), the "dea d"
party has displayed rema rkable powers of rec uperation, co ming back to win importa nt victories.
At the state and congressiona l district levels, however, the parties are not evenly balanced. For a long
time the South was so heavily Democratic at all levels of government as to be a one-party a rea, while
upper New England a nd the Dakotas were strongly
Republican . All regions are more competitive today
than once was the case, but even now one party
tends to enj oy a substantial advantage in at least half
the states and in perhaps two-thirds of the congressional districts. evertheless, though the parties are
not as competitive in state elections as they are in
presidential ones, states have rarely h ad, at least for
any extended period, poli tical parties other than the
Democratic a nd Republica n (see Table 9 .2).
Scholars do not entirely agree on why the twoparty system should be so perman ent a feature of
America n politica l life, but two expla nations are of
major importa nce. The fir st has to do with the system of elections, the second with the distribution of
pub lic op inion.
Elections at every level of government are based
on the plurality. winner-take-all method. The plurality system means that in all elections for representative, senator, governor. or presiden t. a nd in
almost all elections for sta te legislator, mayo r, or city
councillor, the winner is that person who gets the
most votes , even if he or she does not get a majority of
all votes cast. We are so familiar with this system that
we sometimes forget that there are other ways of
running a n election. For example, one could require
that the winner get a majority of the votes, thus
producing runoff elections if n obody got a majority
on the fir st try. France does this in choosing its
national legislature. In the first election candidates

two-party system An electoral system with
two dominant parties that compete in national
elections.
plurality syst em An electoral system in which
the winner is the person who gets the most
votes, even if he or she does not receive a
majority; used in almost all Ameri can el ections.

217

218

Chapter 9

Political Parties

Rise of Republican Politics in the South, 1956-2004
Number of
Representatives

Number of
Senators

Number of
Governors
Oem . Rep.

Year

Oem.

Rep.

Oem. Rep.

1956
1958
1960
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004

99
99
99
95
89
83
80
79
74
81
82

7
7
7
11
17
23
26

22
22
22
21
21
19
18
16
14
15
16
15
11
11
11
16
15
15
14
9
9
8
7
8
4

77
55
80
72

77
80
77
82
61
54
54
54
67
48

27
34

27
26
31
53
33
41
39
36
39
43
64
71
71
71
64
83

0
0
0

(1)'
(1)'
(1)'
(1)'
(1)'
(1)'

1
3
4
5
7
6
5
6
10
11
11
6
7
7
8

13
13
14
15
14
18

11
11
11
11
11
9
9
9
8
8
9
8
6
11
10
6
6
8
8
5
4
4
6
6
4

0
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
3
3
2
3
5
0
5
5
3
3
6
7
7
5
5
7

Number of States
Voting for
Presidential Nominee
Oem.

Rep.

6

5

8'

2

6

5
5b

0

11

10
10
0

11

0

11

4

7

4

7

0

11

0

11

' Eight Mississippi electors voted for Harry Byrd .
bGeorge Wallace won five states on the American Independent ticket.
' Harry Byrd, Jr., was elected in Virginia in 1970 and 1976 as an independent.
'Virgil H. Goode, Jr., was elected in Virginia in 1996 as an independent.

for parliament who win an absolute majority of the
votes cast are declared elected. A week later remaining candid ates who received at least one-eighth, but
less than one-half of the vote, go into a runoff election; those who then win an absolute majority are
also declared elected.
The French method encourages many poli tica l
parties to form, each hoping to win at least oneeighth of the vote in the first election and then to
enter into an alli ance with its ideologica lly nearest
rival in ord er to win the runoll In the United States
the plurality system means that a party must make
all the a llia nces it can before the Ilrst election- there
is no second chance. Hence every party must be as
broad ly based as possible; a narrow. minor party has
no hope of winning.

The winner-take-all feature of American elections
has the same effect. Only one member of Congress is
elected from each district. In many European countries the elections are based on propor tion al represen tation. Each party submits a li st of candid ates for
parliament. ra nked in order of preference by the
party leaders. The nation votes. A party winning 37
percent of the vote gets 37 percent of the seats in
parlia ment; a party winning 2 percent of the vote
gets 2 percent of the seats. Since even the sma ll est
parties have a chance of winn ing something, minor
parties have a n incentive to organize.
The most dramatic exa mp le of the winner-take-a ll
principle is the electoral co llege (see Chapter 14). In
every state but Maine and ebraska, the candidate
who wins the most popular votes in a state wins all of

The Two-Party System
that state's electoral votes. In 199 2, ('o r example, Bill
Clinton won only 45 percent of the po pular vote in
Missouri. but he got all of Missouri's eleven electo ral
votes because his two rivals (George Bush a nd Ross
Perot) each got fewer popular votes. Minor parties
cannot compete under this system. Voters are often
relucta nt to "waste" their votes on a minor-party
ca ndid ate who cannot win.
The United States has experimented with other
electoral systems. Proportional representation was
used for municipal elections in New York City at one
time and is still in use for that purpose in Ca mbridge,
Massachusetts. Many states have elected more than
one state legislator from each district. In [liinois, for
example. three legislators have been elected from
each district, with each voter all owed to cast two
votes, thus virtu ally guaranteeing that the minority
party will be able to win one of the three seats. But
none of these experiments has altered the national
two-party system, probab ly because of the existence
of a directly elected pres ident chosen by a winnertake-all electoral college.
The presidency is the great prize of American politics; to win it you must farm a party with as broad
appeal as possible. As a practical matter that means
there will be, in most cases, only two serious partiesone made up of those who support the party already
in power, and the other made up of everybody else.
Only one third party ever won the presidency- the
Republica ns in 1860- a nd it h ad by then pretty much
supplanted the Whig party. No third party is likely to
win, or even come close to winning, the presidency
anytime soon. Despite the decline in mass party
attachment, among Americans who actually vote in
presidential elections, party voting is almost as strong
today as it was in the early 1950s. As Table 9.3 shows,
in the presidential election s of 1984 through 2004,

Table 9.3

219

the vast majority of Democrats voted ('or the Democrat, and the vast majority of Republicans voted ('or
the Republican. Meanwhile, most independents voted
for the winning Republican in 1984, 1988, and 2000,
and pluralities of independents voted for the winning
Democrat in 1992 and 1996. In the 2004 presidential election, Independents voted for Democrat John
Kerry by a margin of 49 percent to 48 percent, but
Republica n George W. Bush still won the national
popular vote by a margin of 51 to 48 percent.
The seco nd expla nation for the persistence of the
two-party system is to be found in the opinions of the
voters. There remains a kind of rough parity between
the two pa rties regarding which of them most citizens think is lilcely to govern best on given issues. For
example, in public opinion surveys conducted in
1997 and 1998, respondents favored the Repub licans over the Democrats on national defense and
crime, favored the Democrats over the Republican s
on poverty and the enviro nment, and were split
evenly between the two pa rties on taxes and economic prosperity (see Table 9.4).
Though there have been periods of bitter dissent.
most of the time most citizens have agreed enough to
permit them to come together into two broad coalitions. There has not bee n a massive a nd persistent
body of opinion that h as rejected the preva ilin g economic system (a nd thus we have not had a Marx ist
party with mass appeal): there h as not been in our
history an aristocracy or monarchy (and thus there
has been no party that ha s sought to restore aristocrats or monarchs to power). Churches and religion
have alm ost always been regarded as matters of priva te cho ice that lie outsid e politics (and thus there
has not been a party seeking to create or abolish special government priv il eges for one church or a nother). In so me European nations the organization of

Party Voting in Presidential Elections
1988

1992

1996

2004

2000

Party Affiliation
of Vot er

Oem . Rep.

Oem. Rep.

Democrat
Republican
Independent

85 %
7
43

82%
7
39

15%
93
57

Source: Data from CNN exit polls for each year.

Ind .

8 % 10%
77
16
31
30

Oem. Rep.

84%
13
43

Ind.

10 % 5%
80
6
17
35

Oem . Rep. Ind.

85 %
7
37

10%
91
42

3%
1
9

Oem.

Rep.

Ind .

89%
6
49

11%
93
48

0%
0

Chapter 9

220

Table 9.4

Political Parties

-'.

Question
Do you think the Republican party or the Democratic party would
do a better job o f dealing with each of the following issues and
problems 7

Democrats

Republicans

Advantage Republ icans
Nation al defense *
Forei gn t rad e
Crim e
Campaign fi nance refor m

37%
35
36
31

53 %
48
43
37

Split Between the Parties
Eco nomic prosperity
Ta xes

44
43

42
42

Advantage Democrat s
Poverty *
Enviro nment
Hea lt h care
Social Secur ity

61
54
51
46

27
31
34
35

*Question on this item asked as " Which party, the Democrats or the
Republicans, do you trust to do a better job on ... ?"
Source: The Public Perspective (April/May 1998): 13, reporting the resu lts
of a survey by the Gallup Organization for CNN/USA Today, October
27- 28, 1997, and a survey by ABC News/Washington Post, Janu ary
15- 19, 1998.

the economy, the prerogatives of the monarchy. and
the role of th e church have been major issues with
long and bloody histories. So divisive have these
issues been that they have helped prevent the form ation of broad coalition pa rties.
But Americans h ave h ad other deep divisionsbetween white a nd black. for example. and between
North a nd South- a nd yet the two-par ty system has
endured. This suggests th at our electoral procedures
are of great importance-the winner-take-all, plurality election rules have made it useless for anyone
to attempt to create a n all -white or a n all-black
national party except as a n act of momentary defiance or in the hope of taking enough votes away
from the two major pa rties to force the presidential
election into the House of Representatives. (That
may have been George Wallace's strategy in 1968. )
For ma ny years there was an additional reason for
the two-party system: the laws of ma ny states made
it difficult. if not impossible, for third parties to get on

the ba ll ot. In 19 68, for example. the America n Independen t party of George Wallace found that it wou ld
have to co ll ect 433,000 sign atures (15 percent of
the votes cast in the last statewide election) in ord er
to get on the presidential ball ot in Ohio. Wallace took
the issue to the Supreme Court. wh ich r uled. six to
three, that such a restriction was an unconstitutional violation of the equal-protection clause of the
Fo urteenth Amendment. ] 9 Wallace got on the ballot.
In 1980 John Anderson, running as a n independ ent.
was able to get on the ballot in all fifty states; in 1992
Ross Perot did the sa me. But for the reasons already
indicated. the two-par ty system will probably persist
even without the aid of legal restr ictions.

...:. Minor Parties
The electora l system may prevent minor parties (rom
winning. but it does not prevent them fro m forming.
Minor parties- usually called, er roneously, "third
pa rties"- have been a permanent feature of American poli tica l life. Four major kinds of minor par ties.
with exa mples of each. are described in the box on
page 221.
The mi nor parties that have endured have been the
ideological ones. Their members feel themselves to be
outside the mainstream of American political life and
sometimes. as in the case of various Marxist parties.
look forward to a time when a revolution or some other
dramatic change in the politica l system will vindicate
them. They are usually not interested in immediate
electoral success and thus persist despite their poor
shOWing at the polls. One such party. however, the
Socialist party of Eugene Debs. won nearly 6 percent of
the popu lar vote in the 1912 presidential election and
during its heyday elected some twelve hundred candidates to local offices, including seventy-nine mayors.
Part of the Socialist appeal arose from its opposition
to municipa l corruption. part from its opposition to
American entry into World War I. and part from its
critique of American society. No ideological party has
ever carried a state in a presidential election.
Apart from the Republicans, who quickly became
a major party, the only min or parties to carry states
a nd thus win electoral votes were one party of economic protest (the Popu li sts, who car ried five states
in 1892) and several factiona l parties (most recently,
the States' Ri ghts Democrats in 1948 a nd the Amer-

Mino r Parties

221

HOW THINGS WORK
Types of Minor Parties
Ideological parties: Parties professing a comprehensive view of American society and government that is
radically different from that of the established parties.
Most have been Marxist in outlook, but some are quite
the opposite, such as the Libertarian party.
Examples:
Socialist pa rty (1901 to 1960s)
Social ist Labor party (1888 to present)
Socialist Workers party (1938 to present)
Communist pa rty (1920s to present)
Libe rtarian pa rty (1972 to present)
Green party (1984 to present)
One-issue parties: Parties seeking a single policy,
usually revealed by the ir names, and avoiding other
issues.
Examples:
Free-Soil party- to prevent the spread of slavery
(1848- 1852)
American or "Know-Noth ing" party- to oppose
immigration and Catholics (1856)
Prohibiti on party- to ban the sale of liquor (1869 to
present)
Woman's party-to obtain the right to vot e for
women (1913- 1920)

ica n Independent party of George Wall ace in 1968).
Though factional parties may hope to ca use the
defeat of the party from which they split, they have
not always been ab le to achieve this. Harry Truman
was elected in 1948 despite the defections of both
the leftist progressives, led by Henry Wallace, and the
right-wing Dixiecrats, led by J. Strom Thurmond. In
1968 it seems likely that Hubert Humphrey would
have lost even if George Wallace had not been in the
race (Wall ace voters would probably have switched
to Nixon rather than to Humphrey, though of course
one cannot be certain). It is quite possible, on the
other hand , that a Repub lican might have beaten
Woodrow Wilson in 1912 if the Republican party
had not split in two (the regulars supporting William

Economic-protest parties: Parties, usually based in a
particular region, especially involving farmers, that
protest against depressed economic conditions .
These tend to disappear as conditions improve.
Examples:
Greenback pa rty (1876- 1884)
Populist party (1892- 1908)
Factional parties: Parties that are created by a split in
a major party, usually over the identity and philosophy of the major party's presidential cand idate.
Examples:
Split off from the Republican party:
"Bull Moose " Progress ive party (1912)
La Follette Progressive party (1924)
Split off from the Democratic party:
States' Rights (" Dixiecrat") party (1948)
Henry Wallace Progressive party (1948)
American Independent (George Wallace) party
(1968)
Sp lit off from both Democrats and Republicans:
Reform party (Ross Perot)

Howard Taft, the progressives supporting Theodore
Roosevelt).
What is striking is not that we have had so many
minor parties but that we have not had more. There
have been several major political movements that did
not produce a significant third party: the civil rights
movement of the 1960s, the antiwar movement of
the same decade, and , most important, the labor
movement of th e twentieth century. African Americans were part of the Republican party after the Civil
War and part of the Democratic party after the New
Deal (even though the southern wing of that party
for a long time kept them from voting). The antiwar
movement found candidates with whom it cou ld
identify within the Democratic party (Eugene

222

Chapter 9

Political Parties

The Socialist pnrty nnd the Progressive pnrty
were both minor pnrties. but their origins were
different. The Socialist pa rty was an ideological
pnrty; the "Bull Moose" Progressive party split
off from the Republicans to support Theodore
Roosevelt.

CHAwrER M£M8£ItSHIP Cf:RTI,.ICATIt
1912 CAMPAIGN

TH •• 1& A ___eE l"
"'0'-' 0". DOLL A" co,, ""afJT.O 1'0
CAM~AION 'UNO 01' THC ~"OGJltC •• IYC ,.A.TV ,

TH&

McCarthy, Robert F. Ken nedy, George McGovern).
even though it was a Democratic president, Lyndon
B. Johnson, who was chiefly responsible for the U.S.
commi tment in Vietn am. After Johnson only narrowly won the 1968 New Hampshire primary, he
withdrew from the race. Unions have not tried to create a labor party-indeed, they were for a lon g time
opposed to almost any kind of national political
activity. Sin ce labor became a major political force in
the 1930s, the largest industrial union s have been
content to operate as a pa rt (a very la rge part) of the
Democratic par ty.
One reason why some potenti al sources of minor
pa rties never formed su ch par ties, in addition to the
dim cha nce of success, is that the direct primary and
the national convention have made it possible for dissident elements of a major party, unless th ey become
completely di saffected, to remain in the party a nd

influence the choice of candidates and policies. The
antiwar movement had a profound effect on the
Democratic conventions of 1968 and 1972: Africa n
America ns h ave pl ayed a growin g role in the Democratic party. especially with the candidacy of Jesse
Jackson in 1984 a nd 1988 ; only in 1972 did the
unions feel that the Democrats nomin ated a presidential candid ate (McGovern) unacceptable to them.
The impact of minor parties on America n poli tics
is hard to judge. One bit of convention al wisdom
holds th at minor parties develop ideas that th e major
parties later come to adopt. The Socialist pa rty. for
example, is supposed to h ave ca lled for major social
and economic policies that the Democrats under
Roosevelt later embraced a nd termed the New Dea l.
It is possib le that th e Democrats did steal the thunder
of the Socialists. but it h ardly seems likely that they
did it because the Socialists had pro posed these

Nominating a President

wished to go slow on desegregation . The threat of a
factional split is a risk that both major parties must
face. and it is in the efforts that each makes to avoid
such splits that one finds the greatest impact. at least
in this century, of minor parties.
In 1992 and again in 1996, Ross Perot led the
most successful recent third-party movement. It
began as United We Stand America and was later
renamed the Reform party. Perot's appeal seemed to
reflect a growing American dissatisfaction with the
existing political par ties and a heigh tened demand
for bringing in a leader who would "run the government without politics. " Of course it is no more possible to take politics ou t of governing than it is to take
churches out of religion. Though unrealistic. people
seem to want policies witho ut bargaining.

*
Robert M. La Follette campaigned Jor the presidency as
tile candidate of the Progressive Party in 1924. He VJon
17 percellt of tile vote.

things or proved them pop ular. (In 1932 the Socialists got only 2 percent of the vote and in 1936 less
than one- half of 1 percent.) Roosevelt probably
adopted the policies he did in part beca use he
thought them correct and in part because dissident
elements within his own party- leaders such as
Huey Long of Louisiana-were threatening to bolt
the Democratic party if it did not move to the left.
Even Prohibition was adopted more as a result of the
efforts of interest groups such as the Anti-Saloon
League than as the consequence of its endorsement
by the Pro hibition party.
The minor parties that have probably had the
greatest influence on public policy have been the factional parties. Mugwumps a nd liberal Republicans,
by bolting the regular party, may have made that
party more sensitive to the issue of civil ser vice
reform; the Bull Moose and La Follette Progressive
parties probably helped encourage the major parties
to pay more atten tion to issues of business regulation
and par ty reform; the Dixiecrat and Wallace movements probably strengthened the hands of those who

Nominating a President

The major parties face, as we have seen , two contrary
forces : one, generated by the desire to win the presidency, pushes them in the direction of nominating a
candidate who can appea l to the majority of voters
and who will thus have essentially middle-of-theroad views. The other, produced by the need to keep
dissident elements in the party from bolting and
forming a third party, leads them to compromise
with dissidents or extremists in ways that may damage the party's standing with the voters.
The Democrats and Republicans have always
faced these conf1icting pressures, but of late they
have become especially acute. When the presidential
nomination was made by a party convention that
was heav ily influenced, if not controlled. by par ty
leaders and elected officials, it was relatively easy to
ignore dissident factions and pick candidates on the
basis of who could win. The electoral objectives of the
par ty were predominant. The result was that often a
faction left the party and ran a separate ticket-as in
1912, 1924, 1948, 1968 , and 1980. Today the
power of party lea ders and elected officials within
the par ties is greatly diminished, with most delegates
now selected by primary elections. A larger proportion of the delegates is likely to be more interested in
issues and to be less amenable to compromise over
those issues than formerly. In these circumstances
the policy interests of the party activists are likely to
be important.

223

Chapter 9

224

Political Parties

Are the Delegates Representative
of the VOters?
There would be no conflict between the electoral and
(Jolicy interests of a (Jolitical party if the delegates to
its nominating convention had the same policy views
as most voters, or at least as most (Jarty sU(J(Jorters.
In fact this is not the case: in (Jarties, as in many
organizations, the activ ists and leaders tend to have
views different from those of the rank and file.20 In
American (Jolitical (Jarties in recent years this difference has become very great.
In 1964 the Repub lican party nominated the
highly conservative Barry Goldwater l'or president.
We have no o(Jinion data for delegates to that convention as detailed and co mprehens ive as those
ava ilable for subsequent conventions, but it seems
clear that the Re(Jublican delega tes selected as their
nominee a person who was not the most (Jopular
candidate among voters at large and th us not the
candidate most li kely to win.
At every Democratic national convention since
1972 the delegates have had views on a variety of
important issu es that were vastly different from
those of rank-and -file Democrats. On we lfare, military pol icy, school desegregation, crime, and abortion, Democratic delegates expressed opinions almost
diametrically opposed to those of most Democrats.
The delegates to the 1980, 1984, and (to a lesser

TableS.S

. ..
-

~

-

•

••

Liberal Ideology

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

Democrats
Delegates
Voters

66%
31

39 %
25

47%
28

43%
27

41%
34

Republicans
Delegates
Voters

2
15

12

12

0
7

8

Sources: For 1984: Los Angeles Times (August 19, 1984); for 1988: New
York Times/C BS News poll, in New York Times (August 14, 1988); for
1992 : New York Times (July 13 and August 17, 1992) and unpublished
CBS News poll, "The 1992 Republican Convention Delegates"; for 1996:
New York Times (August 12 and 26, 1996); for 2000, New York Times

(August 29, 2004).

extent) 1988, 1992 , 1996, and 2000 conventions
were ideologically very different from the voters at
large. The Democratic delegates were more liberal
than the Democratic voters , and the Republican delegates were more conservative than the Republican
voters (see Table 9.5). 21
What accounts for the sh ar(J dis(Jarity between
delegate o(Jin ion (and often delegate candidate preference) and voter attitudes? Some blame the discre(Jancy on the rules, described earlier in this cha(Jter,
under which Democratic delega tes are chosen, especia lly those that require increased representation for
women, minorities, and the young. Close examination suggests that this is not a co mplete explanation.
For one thing, it does not eX(Jlain why the Re(Jublicans nominated Goldwater in 1964 (and almost
nominated Ronald Reagan instead of Gera ld Ford in
19 76). For another, women, minorities, and youth
have among them all shades of opinions: there are
many middl e-of-the-road women and young people,
as well as very liberal or very conservative ones.
(There are not many very co nservative African
Americans, at least on race issues. but there are certainly (Jlenty who are moderate on race and conservative on other issues.) The question is why only
certain elements of these groups are heavily re(Jresented at the conventions.

Who VOtes in Primaries?
Maybe delegates are unrepresentative of the party
rank and file because they are chosen in caucuses
and (Jrimary elections whose (Jartici(Jants are unrepresentative. Before 1972 most delegates were picked
by (Jarty leaders; primaries were relatively unim(Jortant, and voter ca ucuses were almost unheard-of.
Adlai Stevenson in 1952 and Hubert Humphrey in
1968 won the Democratic presidential nominations
without even entering a primary. Harry Truman
once described primaries as "eyewash ."22
After 1972 they were no longer eyewas h. The vast
majority of delegates were selected in primaries and
caucuses. In 1992 forty states an d territories held
(Jrimaries, and twenty held caucuses (some places
had both primaries and caucuses) .
Only about half as many people vote in primaries
as in general elections. If these primary voters have
more extreme political views than do the rank-andfil e party followers , then they might support presidential delegates who also h ave extreme views.

Parties Versus Voters
However, there is not much evidence that such is the
case. Studies comparing the ideological orientations
of primary voters with those of rank-and-file party
voters show few strong differences. 23
When it comes to presidential primaries, a good
figh t draws a crowd . For example, in twelve of the
first eighteen Republican presidential primaries in
2000, voter turnout hit record highs as Governor
George W. Bush battled state by state to stay ahead of
Senator John McCain. But the "crowd " represented
only 13.6 percent of the voting-age population, up
4.3 percent from the 1996 turnout, and the highest
since Senator Barry Goldwater's campaign for the
nomination divided Republicans in 1964.24 In the
states that voted after Bush had the nomination al l
but won, turnout was considerably lower. Likewise,
the contest between Vice President Al Gore and Senator Bill Brad ley resulted in the second-lowest Democratic presidential primary turnout since 1960.
Primaries differ from caucuses. A caucus is a
meeting of party followers , often lasting for hours
and held in the dead of winter in a schoo lhouse mil es
from home, in which party delegates are picked . Only
the most dedicated partisans attend. For the Democrats these have been liberals: for the Republicans,
conservatives. In 1988 the most liberal Democratic
candidate, J~sse Jackson, got more delegates in the
Alaska, Delaware, Michigan, and Vermont caucuses
than did Michael Dukakis. the eventual nominee.
Repu blican evangelist Pat Robertson did not win any
primary, but he won the caucuses in Alaska, Hawaii,
and Wash ington.

Who Are the New Delegates?
However delegates are chosen, they are a different
breed today than they once were. Whether picked by
caucuses or primaries, and whatever their sex and
race, a far larger proportion of convention delegates,
both Republican and Democratic, are issue-oriented
activists- people with an "amateur" or "purist" view
of politics. Far fewer delegates are in it for the money
(there is no longer much patronage to pass around)
or to help their own reelection prospects. For example, in 1980 only 14 percent of the Democratic senators and 15 percent of the Democratic members of
the House were delegates to the national convention.
In 1956. by contrast, 90 percent of the senators and
33 percent of the representatives were delegates. 25
Party activists. especially those who work without

pay and who are in politics out of an interest in
issues, are not likely to resemble the average citizen,
for whom politics is merely an object of observation,
discussion, and occasional voting.
The changing incentives for participation in party
work, in addition to the effects of the primary system, have contributed to the deve lopment of a
national presidential nominating system different
from that which once existed. The advantage of the
new system is that it increases the opportunity for
those with strong po licy preferences to playa role in
the party and thus reduces the chance that they will
bolt the party and form a factional minor party. The
disadvantage of the system is that it increases the
chances that one or both parties may nominate presidential candidates who are not appealing to the
average voter or even to a party's rank and fi le.
In sum, presidential nominating conventions are
now heavily influenced by ideologically motivated
activists. Democratic conventions have heavy representation from organized feminists , unionized
schoo lteachers, and abortion rights activists;
Republican conventions have large numbers of
antiabortion activists, Christian conservatives, and
small-government libertarians. As a result the presidential nominating system is now fundamentaHy
different from what it was as late as the mid-19 60s.

'*

Parties Versus Voters

Since 1968 the Democratic party has had no trouble
winning congressional elections but great difficulty
winning presidential contests. Except for 1980- 1986
and since 1994. the Democrats have controlled both
houses of Congress; except for 1976, 1992, and
1996, they have lost every presidential election. The
Republican party has had the opposite problem:
though it won five out of seven presidential elections
between 1968 and 1992, it did not control Congress
for the forty years preceding its big win in 1994.
There are many reasons for this odd state of
affa irs, most of which will be discussed later. But one

caucus

A m eeting of party members to select
delegates backing one or anothe r primary
cand idat e.

225

226

Chapter 9

Political Parties

requires attention here. The difficulty the Democrats
have h ad in competing for the pres idency is in part
because th eir ca ndid ates for th e presidency have had .
on certa in issu es- chi efly socia l a nd ta xation
issues-v iews very diffe rent from th ose of the average voter. That disparity to a lar ge degree mirrors
(and may be caused by) the gu lf th at separates the
opinions of delegates to Democratic nominating conventions from the opinions of most citizens.
The Republicans have not been immune to th is
problem. In 1964 they nominated a ca ndid ate. Barry
Goldwater. whose beliefs placed him well to the r ight
of most voters. Not surprisin gly. he lost. And the delega tes to recent Republi ca n conventions have held
opini ons on so me matters th at continu e to be very
different from most people·s. Still. the problem has
been somewhat more acute for the Democrats .
The problem ca n be seen in Table 9.6. A lot of
information is show n there; to understa nd it. study
the table step by step. First. look at the middle column . which summa rizes the views of voters in
2004. (Because there a re about the same number of
Democratic and Republican voters. the opinion of
the average voter is about h alfway between those
of the foll owers of the two parties.) Now look at the
columns on the far left a nd the far ri ght. These show
the views of delegates to the 2004 Democra tic and

Table 9.6

'.

Republica n conven tions. On almost every iss ue the
delegates are in sha rp disagreement. There were
hardly a ny co nser vatives at the Democratic conventi on or liberals at the Republican convention. On
each and every issu e. th e delegates were at opposite
ends of the spectrum.
Still, either party can win if its delegates nominate
a candidate whose views pu t him or her closer to the
average citize n than to the average delega te or if th e
ca mpaign is fought ou t over issues on which the delegates and the voters agree. For example, if th e election turned on wh a t to do a bout an economic
recession. the delegates. the voters. a nd the candidate would probably all ag ree: do whateve r is necessary to end the recess ion. Exactly tha t happened in
1992, and the Democrats wo n.
Of co urse, even without a scandal. recession. or
some other unifying issue. the need to win an election w ill lead all candidates to move toward the middle of the road. That is where the votes are. But th is
creates a di lemma for a ca ndidate of either pa rty. The
stance one ta kes to win support from pa rty activists
in th e ca ucuses and primaries will often be quite different from the stan ce one should take to win votes
from the general public. In the next chapter we shall
look more closely at how politicians try to cope with
that dilemm a.

. ••
Democratic
Delegates

Voters

Republican
Delegates

Who They Are
Mal e
Female
Afri can American
Inco me over $75,000

50 %
50
18
61

49%
51
14
28

57%
43
6
58

What Th ey Think
Govern ment should do more to solve nati ona l problems.
Abo rti on should be generally available.
Religi on is extremely important in daily life.
Governm ent's antiterro rism la ws restr ict civil liberties.
The penalty f or murd er shoul d be death, not lif e in pri son .
Protect t he environment even if jo bs are lost beca use of it .
There sho uld be no lega l recogniti on of a gay co upl e's relat ionship.

79
75
21
77
19
62
5

42
34
28
43
50
52
39

9
13
39
15
57
25
49

Source: New York Times/CBS News polls as reported in Katharine Q. Seeley and Marjorie Con nelly. " The Conventioneers; Delegates Leaning to th e Right of G.O.P and the Nation, " New York Times, August 29, 2004.

~r~~~:~g~ouP Threatens
February I
HARRISBURG, PA
At a televised

t

R

press conferenc I

op epublican off· . l
east week several
th ..
ICla s ca lJed fI "
ell party 's pro-life platfor
or Inoderating"
antIabortion political t. In. Yesterday a leading
b
·
ac Ion COIn .
Y runnJ1Jg fu IJ-pag
InIttee responded
,,. d
e newspa .
In ependent candidat
pel ads ca IJing for
es and a tl ··d
·
sent the Views of pro-life R 111 party to reprecrats alike" . . .
epubiIcans and DeIno-

MEMORANDUM
To: Harry Bower, president of Republicans
for Life
From: Patricia Nucanon, political consultant
Subject: Forming a third party
Without regard to your organization's particular cause or issue, I have been employed
to brief you on the general pros and cons of backing independent candidates and
forming a third party.
Arguments for:
1. Independent and third-party candidates can garner votes and even win . In 1992
independent candidate Ross Perot won nearly a fifth of the vote for president . In
1998 the Reform party candidate Jesse Ventura became governor of Minnesota.
2. Even losing independent candidates (Eugene Debs, Robert La Follette, and George
Wallace, to name just three) have made real marks on American politics.
"Unsuccessful" third parties were the first to advocate policy positions later
championed by the two main parties: abolishing slavery (Free-Soil party), giving
women the vote (Woman's party), the direct election of senators (Progressive party),
and many others .
3. Splitting off from a major party courts public attention and eventually gets policy
results.
Arguments against:
1. The two-party system is supported by more than 150 years of political tradition
featuring winner-take-all, single-member election districts. Since the 1850s, more
than 100 third parties and thousands of independent candidates have come, gone,
and been forgotten by all except historians.
2. Usually the two main parties adapt and co-opt, not adopt, third-party ideas and
positions . In the 1930s the Democrats watered down the Socialist party's plan and
gave birth to the Social Security system . In the 1980s the Republican position on tax
rel ief was but a faint echo of the Libertarian party's.
3. Splitting off from a major party courts political oblivion and reduces the chances
that the issue or cause will be raised or represented even halfheartedly by either
main party.
Your decision:
Favor a third party _ __
Oppose third party _ __

228

Chapter 9

'*

Political Parties

SUMMARY

A

Political party exists in three arenas: among the
voters who psychologica lly identify with it. as a
grassroots organization sta ffed and led by activists,
and as a group of elected olTicials who follow its lead
in lawmaking. In this ch apter we have looked at the
par ty primarily as an orga niza tion and seen the various form s it takes at the loca l level- the machine,
the ideologica l party, the so lida ry group, the sponsored party. and the personal foll owing.
The spread of the direct primary has made it
harder for parties to control who is nominated for
elective office, thus malting it harder for the parties to
influence the behavior of these people once elected .
Delegate selection rules , especially in the Democratic
party, have helped shift the center of power in the
nationa l n ominating convention. Because of the
changes in rules. power h as moved away from office-

holders and party regul a rs a nd toward the more ideologica l win gs of the parties.
Minor parties have arisen Crom time to time. but
the only ones that have affected the outcome of presidential elections have been those that represented a
splinter group within one of the major parties (such
as the Bull Moose progressives). The two-party system
is maintained, and minor parties are discouraged , by
an election system (winner-take-all, plurality elections) that makes voters reluctant to waste a vote on a
minor party and by the ability of potential minor parties to wield influence within a major party by means
of the primary system.
In the next chapter we shall look at the role of parties in shaping voter attitudes, and in Chapter 13 we
shall look at the role of parties in Congress. In each of
these areas we will find more evidence of party decay.

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?
1. How has America's two-party system changed,
al1d how does it differ };'OI11 the party systerlls of

other representative democracies?
American parties during the nineteenth century and
the first h alf of the twentieth century were strong
organizations that picked their candid ates for olTice.
Parties in European democracies still do that, but
America has changed . Now. candidates are usually
picked by direct primary elections as the American
voters' loyalty to parties has weakened.

2. How IIlUch do parties a}Ject how Americalls vote?
Registered Democrats are more Likely to vote for Democratic ca ndidates, a nd registered Republicans are more
likely to vote for Republican candidates, but more voters
now register as independents, the proportion of people
identUying with one or the other party has declined,
and split-ticket voting has been common in the American electorate. The declining attachment of voters to
parties and their weaknesses as organizations have led
many candidates for president and other offices to run
more as individuals than as party members.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. Did the Founding Fathers thinT, that political
parties were a good idea?
o. For exa mple. George Washin gton denounced
parties as "factions." But as soon as it was time to
select his replacement. the republic's first leaders
realized they had to orga nize their followers to win
the election, and parties were born. It was not. however. until well into the nineteenth century that the
idea of a permanent two-party system was consid ered legitimate by virtually a ll of the country 's politiCet! lea ders.

2. How. if at all, shou ld America's two-party system be reformed?

Any answer should depend , at least in part, on how
one eva luates the many reforms that already have
bee n made. For instance. some argue that the parties
should beco me more open to popular inl'luences. To a
large extent. however. that has alrea dy happened.
Whereas once presidential candidates were selected
by party leaders. today they are selected by primaries. Others maintain that there is li ttle rea l difference
between the two parties. That opinion. however. is at

Summary

variance with the wide differences on many important issues one finds in party platforms, as well as
with the fact that delegates to the Repub li can
Nationa l Convention and delegates to the Democratic Nationa l Convention differ widely on the iss ues.
Still others co ntend that the plurality system in
which the winner is the ca ndidate who gets the most
votes, even if he or she does not receive a majority, is

unfair to minor or third-party candidates. Perhaps,
but Bill Clinton was twice (1992 and 1996) a popular plurality president. Besides, America has had little experience with other voting or party systems,
and democracies that have proportional voting or
multiparty systems have other shortcomings (such
as unduly empowering small parties with extreme
views) .

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

Democratic ationa l Committee:
www.democrats.org
Republican National Committee: www.rnc.org

Green party: www.greens.org
Li bertarian party: www.lp.org
Reform party: www.reformparty.org

SUGGESTED READINGS
Cha mbers. Willi am Nisbet, and Wa lter Dea n Burnham. eds. The
Alilerican Party Systems: Stages of Political Developlllelit. 2 nd ed.
New York: Oxford Uni versity Press. 19 75 . Essays tracin g th e
ri se of t he party system sin ce the Foundin g.
Gold win . Robert A .. ed. Political Parties ill the Eighties. Was hin gton.
D. C. : Ameri ca n Enterprise In stitute. 1980. Essays eva luating
pa rti es and efforts at reform.
Key. V. 0 .. jr. SOlltlJern Politics. New York: Knopf. ] 949. A classic
acco unt of t he one-party South .
May hew. David R. Placing Parties ill Alllerican Poli tics. Prin ceton.
N.j.: Pri nceton Uni vers ity Press. ] 986 . f\ state- by-s tate
description of sta te party orga niza ti ons.
Nader. Ralph . Crashillg the Part!}: Takillg 0 11 the Corporate Govemmell t ill (II I Age of SlIrrelldeJ: ew York: Sl. Marlin 's Press. 2 00 2.
An im passio ned attack on the two-party system by a we ll kn ow n acti vist who ran for pres ide n t as a minor-party cand idate in 2000 a nd 2004.
Po lsby. Nel so n W. COllscqllcnces of Party Hejimn. New York: Oxford
Un iversity Press. t 983 . Fine an a lys is of how cha n ged party
rul es have affected th e parties a nd th e gove rnm en t.

Ra nn ey. Austin . Curillg tile Mi schiefs of Faction: Party HeJorm in
America. Berkeley: University of Ca liforni a Press. 1975. Hi story a nd analysis of party ;' reform s." with specia l a ttenti on
to th e 19 72 ch anges in th e De mocra tic pa rty rules.
Ri ord a n. Wi ll iam L. PllIllkitl of '1(IIIlIlJaIl!} Hall. New York: Knopf.
1948. (Fir st pub li shed in 190 5.) In sightful acco unt of how a n
old-sty le party boss operated.
Schattschn eic1 er. E. E. Party Govemmellt. New York: Holt. Ri neha rt
a nd Win sto n. ] 942. An argum ent for a more di sc iplin ed and
centra lized two-party system.
Sha fer. Byron E. Quiet Revollitioll: Til e Struggle for t1Je DelllOcml.ic
ParLy IIlId UICShaping of Post- Heforlll Politics . New York: Ru ssell
Sage Fo undati on. 19 83 . Deta iled. in sightful history of how the
Dem ocratic party ca me to be reform ed.
Sundquist. ja mes L. Dyna1llics of tile Part.y System. Rev. ed. Wa shington. D. C. : Brookin gs Institution , 198 3 . History of the party
system. emphasizin g the impact of issues on votin g.
Wil son. James Q. '/'lIe Allllltelir Democmt. Chi cago: University of
Chi cago Press. I 962 . Analysis of th e iss ue-oriented politica l
clubs t hat rose in th e 195 0s a nd] 960s.

229

CHAPTER

10

Elections and Campaigns

Presidential Versus Congressional
Campaigns
Running for President •
Elected to Congress

Getting

Primary Versus General Campaigns
Two Kinds of Campaign Issues •
Television, Debates, and Direct Mail

Money
The Sources of Campaign Money •
Campaign Finance Rules • A Second
Campaign Finance Law • New Sources
of Money • Money and Winning

What Decides the Election?
Party • Issues, Especially the Economy
• The Campaign • Finding a Winning
Coalition

The Effects of Elections on Policy

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

2.

How do American elections determine the kind of people who
govern us?
What matters most in deciding who
wins presidential and congressional
elections?

Do elections make a real difference
in what laws get passed?

I

f you want to be elected to Congress or to the presidency, you must develop a game plan that is in tune with the unique legal, political, and financial realities of American politics. A plan that will work here would be
useless in almost any other democratic nation; one that would work abroad
would be useless here.
Elections have two crucial phases-getting nominated and getting elected. Getting nominated means getting your name on the ballot. In the great
majority of states, winning your party's nomination for either the presidency or Congress requires an il1dividual effort- you decide to run, you raise
money. you and your friends collect signatures to get your name on the ballot, and you appeal to voters in primary elections on the basis of your
personality and your definition of the issues. In most European nations
winning your party's nomination for parliament involves an orgal1izatiol1al
decision- the party looks you over, the party decides whether to allow you to
run, and the party puts your name on its list of candidates .
American political parties do playa role in determining the outcome of
the fina l election, but even that role involves parties more as labels in the
voters' minds than as organizations that get out the vote. By contrast, many
other democratic nations conduct campaigns that are almost entirely a
contest between parties as organizations. In Israel and the Netherlands the
names of the candid ates for the legislature do not even appear on the ballot:
only the party names are listed there. And even where candidate names
are listed, as in Great Britain, the voters tend to vote "Conservative" or
"Labour" more than they vote for Smith or Jones. European nations (except
France) do not have a directly elected president; instead the head of the government-the prime minister- is selected by the party that has won the
most seats in parliament.
At one time parties played a much larger role in elections in the United
States than they do now. Until well into this century they determined, or
powerfully influenced, who got nominated. In the early nineteenth century
the members of Congress from a given party would meet in a caucus to pick
their presidential candidate. After these caucuses were replaced by national nominating conventions, the real power over presidential nominations
was wielded by local party leaders, who came together (sometimes in the
legendary "smoke-filled rooms") to choose the cand idate, whom the rest of
the delegates would then endorse.

231

232

Chapter 10

Elections and Ca mpaigns

Congressional cand id ates were often handpicked
by powerful local party bosses. In the past people
were much more ILkely to vote a straight party ticket
than they are today.
Chapter 9 described the factors that weakened the
parties' ability to co ntrol nomination s. There is little
chance that they will ever rega in that control. Thus
candidates are now pretty much on their ow n. So if
you want to be a ca ndid ate. what do you do?

Presidential Versus
Congressional Campaigns
Presidential and congressional races differ in important ways. The most obvious. of co urse, is size: more
voters participate in the former than the latter contests. and so presidential candid ates must work harder and spend more. But there are some less obvious
differences that are equa lly important.
First. presidential races are more competitive than
those for the House of Representatives. In the thirtyfive elections from 1932 to 2000 the Republica ns
wo n control of the House only six times (17 percent
of the time); in the eighteen presidential elections
during the sa me period the Repub li ca ns won the
White House on eight occasions (44.5 percent of the
time). In the typical presidential race the winner gets
less tha n 55 percent of the two-party vote: in the typica l House race. the incumbent wins with over 60
percent of the vote.
Second. a much smaller proportion of people vote
in congressional races durin g off years (that is. when
there is no presidential contest) than vote for president. This lower turnout (around 36 percent of the
voting-age population) means that candidates in
congressional races must be appealing to the more
motivated and partisan voter.
Third . members of Congress ca n do things for
their constituents that a pres ident cannot. They take
cred it-sometim es deserved . sometimes not- for
every grant. contract. bridge. cana l. and highway

The person already holding an
elective office.
coattails The a ll eged tendency of candidates
to win more votes in an election because
of the presence at the top of the ticket of a
better-known candidate, such as the president.

incumbent

that the federal government provides the district or
sta te. They send letters (at the government's expense)
to large fractions of their constituents a nd visit their
districts every weekend. Presid ents get little credit for
district improvements and must rely on the mass
media to communicate with voters.
Pourth. a ca ndidate fa r Co ngress ca n deny that he
or she is respons ible for "th e mess in Washington ."
even when the candid ate is an in cumbent. Incumbents ten d to run as individu a ls. even to the point of
denouncing the very Congress of which they are a
part. An incumbent president ca n't get away with
this; rightly or wrongly, he is often held responsibl e
for whatever has gone wrong, not only in the government but in the nation as a whole.
These last three factors- low voter turnout, services to constituents, and the ability to duck responsibility- probably help explain why so high a percentage
of congressional incumbents get reelected.
But they do not enj oy a completely free ride. Members of Congress who belong to the sa me party as
the pres ident often fee l voters' a nger about national
affa irs, particularly economic condi tions. When the
eco nomy turns sour a nd a Republican is in the White
Ho use, Repub lican co ngressional ca ndidates lose
vo tes; if a Democrat is in the White House, Democratic co ngress iona l ca ndidates lose votes.
At one time the coattails of a popular preS idential can didate co uld help congress ional candidates
in hi s own party. But there has been a sharp decline
in the value of presid enti a l coatta ils: indeed, some
scholars doubt that they sti ll exist.
The net effect of all these factors is that, to a substa ntia l degree, congreSSiona l elections have become
independent of presidential ones. Though economic
fa ctors may still link the fate of a president and some
members of his party, by and la rge the incumbent
members of Congress enjoy enough of a cushion to
protect them aga in st whateve r po litical storms
engulf an unpopular president. This fact further
reduces the meaning of party- members of Congress ca n get reelected even though their party's
"lea der" in the Whi te House has lost popu la r support. a nd nonincumbent ca ndid ates for Co ngress
may lose despite the fact that a very popular president fro m their party is in the White House.

Running for President
The fir st task facing a nyo ne who wishes to be president is to get "mentioned " as so meo ne who is of
"presidentia l ca li ber.·' 0 one is gu ite sure why some

Presidential Versus Congressional Campaigns
people are mentioned and others are not. The journalist David Broder has suggested that somewhere
there is "The Great Mentioner" who announces from
time to time who is of presidential caliber (and only
The Great Mentioner knows how big that caliber is).
But if The Great Mentioner turns out to be as
unreal as the Easter Bunny, you have to figure out for
yourself how to get mentioned. One way is to let it be
known to reporters, "off the record," that you are
thinking about running for president. Another is to
travel around the country making speeches (Ronald
Reagan, while working for Gen eral Electric, made a
dozen or more speeches a day to audiences all over
the co untry). Another way is to already have a
famous name Qohn Glenn, the former astronaut,
was in the public eye long before he declared for the
presidency in 19 84) . Another way to get mentioned
is to be identified with a major piece of legislation.
Former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey was
known as an architect of the Tax Reform Act of
1986; Representative Richard Gephardt of Missouri
was known as an a uthor of a bill designed to reduce
foreign imports. Still another way is to be the governor of a big state. Former New York governors, such
as Mario Cuomo, are often viewed as presidential
prospects, partly because New York City is the headquarters of the television and publishing industries.
Once you are mentioned, it is wise to set aside a lot
o[ time to run. especia lly if you are only "mentioned"
as opposed to being really well known. Ronald Reagan devoted the better part of six years to running;
Walter Mondale spent four years campaigning;
Howard Baker resigned from the Senate in 1984 to
prepare to run in 1988 (he finally dropped out of the
race) . However. most post-1988 candidates-senators Bob Dole, Tom Harkin. Bob Kerrey, Paul Simon,
and John Kerry; governors Michael Dukakis, Bill
Clinton, and George W. Bush; vice presidents George
Bush and Al Gore; and House members Richard
Gephardt and Jack Kemp- made the run while holding elective office.
Though presidential cand id ates come [rom various backgro unds, in general the voters tend to prefer
those with experience as governors or military leaders rather than those who come immediately from
Congress. Some cand id ates , such as John F. Kennedy,
have been elected president directly after being a senator, but most are either war heroes (Dwight Eisenhower), former governors (George W. Bush, Bill
Clinton, Ronald Reagan, Jimmy Carter, and Franklin

233

Political campaigns are hard work, even when you get to Jly on
the vice president's airplane.

D. Roosevelt) or former members of Congress who
h ave already had experience as vice presidents
(Gerald Ford. Richard Nixo n, Lyndon Johnson, and
Harry Truman).
Money One reason why running takes so much
time is that it takes so long to raise the necessary
money and build up an organization of personal followers. As we shall see later in this chapter, federal
law restricts the amount that any single individual
can give a ca ndidate to $2,000 in each election. (A
political action committee, or PAC, which is a
committee set up by and representing a corporation,
labor union, or other special-interest group, can give
up to $5,000. ) Moreover, to be eligible for federal
matching grants to pay for your primary campaign,
you must first raise at least $5,000, in individual
contributions of $25 0 or less, in each o[ twenty
states.
•

Organization Raising and accounting for this
money requires a staff of fund-raisers , lawyers , and
accountants. You also need a press secretary, a travel
scheduler, an advertiSing specialist, a direct-mail company, and a pollster, all of whom must be paid, plus a

•

political action committee (PAC)

A committee set up by a corporat ion, labor union, or
interest group that raises and spends campaign
money from voluntary donations.

234

Chapter 10

Elections and Campaigns

large number of vo lunteers in at least those states that
hold early primary elections or party caucuses. These
volunteers will brief you on the facts of each state, try
to line up endorsements from local politicians and
celebrities, and put together a group of people who will
knock on doors, make telephone calls, organize receptions and meetings, and try to keep you from mispronouncing the name of the town in which you are
speaking. Finally, you have to assemble advisers on the
issues. These advisers will write "position papers" for
you on all sorts of things that you are supposed to
know about (but probably don't). Because a campaign
is usually waged around a few broad themes, these
position papers rarely get used or even read. The
papers exist so that you can show important interest
groups that you have taken "sound" positions, so that
you can be prepared to answer tough questions, and so
that journalists can look up your views on matters
that may become topical.
• Strategy and Themes Every candidate picks a
strategy for the ca mpaign. In choosing one, much

depends on whether you are the incumbent. Incumbents must defend their records, like it or not. (An
incumbent ran for president in 1964, 1972, 1976,
1980, 1984, 1992 , 1996, and 2004.) The cha llenger attacks the incumbent. When there is no
incumbent (as in 1960, 1968, 1988, a nd 2000),
both candidates can announce their own programs;
however, the candidate from the party that holds the
White House must take, whether he thinks he
deserves it or not. some of the blame for whatever
has gone wrong in the preceding four years. Within
these limits a strategy consists of the answers to
questions about tone, theme, timing, and targets:
• What tone should the campaign have? Should it be
a positive (build-me-up) or negative (attack-theopponent) campaign? In 1988 George H.W Bush
began with a negative campaign; Michael Dukakis
followed suit.
• What theme can I develop ? A theme is a simple,
appealing idea that can be repeated over and over
again. For Jimmy Carter in 1976 it was "trust"; for
Ronald Reagan in 1980 it was "competence" and
in 1984 it was "it's morning again in America";
for Bush in 19 88 it was "stay the course"; for
Clin ton in 1992 it was "we need to change;" for
George W Bush in 2000 it was "compassion ate
co nservatism. "
• What should be th e timing of the campaign? If
you are relatively unknown , yo u will have to put
everything into the ea rly primaries and caucuses,
try to emerge a front-runner, and then hope for
the best. If yo u are already the front-runner, you
may either go for broke early (and try to drive out
all your opponents) or hold back some reserves for
a long fight.
• Whom should you target? Only a small percentage
of voters change their vote from one election to
the next. Who is likely to change this timeunemployed steelworkers? Unhappy farmers?
People upset by inflation?

Getting Elected to Congress

The original Gerrymander: Elbridge Gerry Iwd this
Massachusetts district drawn to ensure the election of a
Republican. Cartoonist Elkanal1 Tinsdale in 1812 compared
the district to a salamander and termed it (I "Gerry-Manda "

A pres ident cannot serve more than two terms, so at
least once every eight years you have a chance of
running against a nonincumbent; members of Congress can serve for an unlimited number of terms ,
and so chances are you wi ll run against an incumbent. If you decide to run for the House, the odds are
very mu ch against you. Since 1962 , over 90 percent

Presidential Versus COl1gressional Campa igns
of the Ho use incumben ts who so ught reelection won
it. In 20 00.394 reelection-seeking incumbents won ,
a nd only 9 lost.
But the in credible in cumbency adva ntage enj oyed
by modern-d ay House members is ha rdly the whole
story of getting elected to Congress. Who serves in
Co ngress. and what interests are represented there, is
affected by how its members are elected. Each state is
enti tled to two senators, who serve Six-yea r terms,
a nd at least one representative. who serves a twoyea r term. How many more representatives a state
has depends on its population; what local groups
these representatives speak for depends in part on
how the district lines are drawn.
The Co nstitution says very little about how represe nta tives will be selected except to requ ire that they
be inhabitants of the states from which they are chosen. It says nothing about districts a nd originally left
it up to the states to decide who wou ld be eligible to
vote for representatives. The size of the first Hou se
was set by the Constitution at Sixty-five members.
a nd the apportio nmen t of the seats among the states
was spelled out in Article I, section 2. From that point
on. it has been up to Congress to decide how ma ny
representatives each state wo uld have (provided th at
each had at least one).
Ini tia lly so me states did not create congress ional
di stricts: a ll their representatives were elected at
large. In other states representatives were elected
fro m multimember as well as Single-member distri cts. In time all states with more than one representative elected each from a single-member district.
How those district bou nd a ri es were drawn. however.
cou ld profoundly a f('ect the outco mes of elections.
There were two problems. One was malapportionment, which results from h av ing districts of very
un equal size. If one district is twice as populous as
a nother. twice as ma ny votes a re needed in the larger district to elect a representa tive. Thu s a citizen 's
vote in the sma ll er district is worth twice as mu ch as
a vote in the larger.
The other pro blem was gerrymande ring, which
mea ns draw ing a district bounda ry in some bizarre
or unusua l shape to make it easy fo r the candidate of
one party to win election in that di strict. In a state
enti tled to ten represen ta tives. where h alf the voters
are Democrats and ha lf a re Republicans. district
lines could be drawn so that eight districts wo uld
have a sli ght majority of citize ns from one par ty a nd
two districts would have lopsided majorities from the

other. Thus it can be made easy for one party to win
eight of the ten seats.
Ma la ppor tio nmen t and gerry ma ndering have
been co nspicuous features of American congressional politics. In 1962 , for example, one district in Texas
had n early a million residents, whil e a nother had less
tha n a qu a rter million. In California Democrats in
control of the state legislature drew district lines in
the ea rly 1960s. so that two pockets of Republica n
strength in Los Angeles separated by ma ny miles
were connected by a thin strip of coastline. In this
way most Republican voters were thrown into one
distri ct, while Democratic voters were spread more
eve nly over severa l.
Hence there are fo ur probl ems to solve in deciding
who gets represented in the House:

1. Esta blishing the total size of the House
2. Allocating seats in the House among the states
3. Determining the size of congress ional districts
within states
4. Determin in g the sh ape of those districts
By a nd large Con gress has decided the first two
questions, a nd the states have decided the last twobut under some rather strict Supreme Court rules.
In 1911 Congress decided that the House had
become la rge enough and voted to fix its size at 43 5
members. There it has rema ined ever since (except
for a br ief period when it had 437 members owing to
th e admi ssion of Alaska a nd Hawa ii to the Uni on in
1959) . Once the size was decid ed upon. it was necessa ry to flnd a formula for performing the painful task
of a pportioning seats among the states as they
ga ined a nd lost popu lation. The Co nstitution
req uires such reapportionment every ten years. A
more or less automatic method was selected in 1929
based on a complex statistical system th at has withstood decades of political a nd sc ientific testing.
Under this system, since 1990 eighteen states have
lost representation in the House a nd eleven have
gained it. Florid a a nd Ca liforni a posted the biggest

Drawing th e boundaries
of leg islative districts so that they are unequal
in popul ation .
ge rrymandering Drawing the boundaries of
leg islative districts in bizarre or unusual shapes
to favor one party.

malapportionment

235

236

Chapter 10

Elections and Campaigns
same size can be drawn to favor one party or another. The co urts have struggled to find answers to these
questions. but they remain fa r from settled.
Number of Seats
After
2000
Census

Change

2000 Census
6
8
45
52
15
23
10
11
11
12
27
30

10
53
25
13
13
32

+4
+8
+10
+3
+2
+5

lost Seats
After Both 1990 and 2000 Census
Illinois
22
20
Michigan
18
16
New York
34
31
Ohio
21
19
Pennsylvania
23
21

19
15
29
18
19

-3
-3
-5
-3
-4

States

Before
1990
Census

Gained Seats
After Both 1990 and
Arizona
Cal ifornia
Florida
Georg ia
North Carolina
Texas

After
1990
Census

Source: U.S . Bureau of the Census.

gain s. while New York and Pennsylvania suffered the
largest losses (see Table 10.1).
The states did little about ma lapportionment and
gerrymandering until ordered to do so by the
Supreme Court. In 1964 the Court ruled th at the
Constitution requires that di stricts be drawn so that.
as nearly as possible, one person's vote wou ld be
worth as much as another's.l The Court rule. "one
person. one vote." seems clear but in fact leaves a
host of questions unanswered. How much deviation
from equ al size is allowable? Should other factors be
considered besid es population? (For example, a state
legislature might want to draw district lines to ma ke
it eas ier for African Americans, Italia n Americans,
farmers, or some other group with a distinct interest
to elect a representative: the requirement of exactly
equal districts might make th is imposs ible.) And the
gerryma ndering prob lem rema ins: districts of the

sophomore surge

An increase in the votes
congress ional candidates usually get when
they first run for reelection .

• Winning the Primary However the district lines
are drawn, getting elected to Congress fir st requires
getting one's name on the ballot. At one time the
politi ca l parties nomin ated candid ates a nd even
printed ballots with the party slates listed on them.
All the voter had to do was take the ballot of the prefer red party a nd put it in th e ball ot box. Today. with
rare exceptions, a candidate wins a party's nomination by gathering enough voter Signatures to get on
the ballot in a primary election. the outcome of
which is often beyond the ability of political parties to
influence. Ca nd id ates tend to form organizations of
personal followings a nd win "their party's" nomination simply by getting more prima ry votes than the
next candidate. It is quite unusual ('o r an incumbent
to lose a primary: [rom 1990 through 2002 only 10
percent of incumbent senators and fewer than 5 percent of incumbent representatives seeking reelection
failed to win renomination in primaries. These statistics suggest how little opportunity pa rties have to
control or punish their congress ional members.
Most newly elected members become strong in
their districts very quickly; thi s is called the sophomore surge. It is the difference between the votes
candid ates get the fir st time they are elected (and
thus become fres hman members) and the votes they
get when they run for reelecti on (i n hopes o[ becoming sophomore members) . Before the 1960s House
candid ates did not do much better the second time
they ran tha n the fir st. Beginning then. however, the
sophomore surge kicked in, so that today freshman
ca ndid ates running for reelecti on will get 8 to 10
percent more votes than when they were fi rst elected .
Senate candidates also benefit now from a sophomore surge, though to a lesser deg ree.
The reason for this surge is that members of Congress have figured out how to use their offices to run
persol/al rather than party campaigns. They make use
of free (" franked ") mail. frequent trips home. radio and
telev ision broadcasts. a nd the distribution of services
to their districts to develop among their constituents a
good opinion of themselves. not their party. They also
cater to their constituents' distrust of the federal government by promising to "clea n things up" if reelected. They run jar Congress by running against it. l

Pri mar y Ve r sus Gel1 eral Campaigl1 s

To the extent that they succeed, they enjoy great
freedom in voting on particular issues and have less
need to explain away votes that their constituents
might not like. If. however. any single-issue groups are
actively working in their districts for or against abortion, gun control, nuclear energy, or tax cuts. muting
the candidates' voting record may not be possible.
• Staying in Office The way people get elected to
Congress has two important effects. First, it produces
legislators who are closely tied to loca l concerns
(their distr icts, their states) , and second, it ensures
that party leaders wi ll have relatively weak inOuence
over them (because those leaders cannot determine
who gets nominated for office).
The loca l orientation of legislators has some
important effects on how po licy is made. For example:
• Every member of Congress organizes bis or her
office to do as much as possible for people back
bome.
• If your representative serves on the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, your
state has a much better chance of getting a new
bridge or canal than if you do not have a representative on this committee. 3
• If your representative serves on the House Appropriations Committee, your district is more likely to
get approval for a federal grant to improve your
water and sewage-treatment programs than if your
representative does not serve on that committee. 4
Former House Speaker Thomas P. "Tip" O'Neill
had this in mind when he said , "All po li tics is local."
Some people think that this localism is wrong: in
their view members of Congress should do what is
best for "the nation as a whole." This argument is
about the role of legislators: are they supposed to be
delegates who do what their district wants or trustees
who use their best judgment on issues without
regard to the preferences of their district?
atura lly most members are some combination of
delegate and trustee, w ith the exact mix depending
on the nature of the issue. But some, as we shall see,
derll1itely lean one way or the other. All members
want to be reelected . but "delegates" tend to value
this over every other consideration and so seek out
committee assignments and projects that wi ll produce benefits for their districts. On the other hand,
"trustees" wil l seek out committee assignments that

give them a chance to address large questions, such
as foreign affa irs, that may have no implications at
all for their districts.

Prinlary Versus General
Campaigns
When you run for federal office. you must run in two
elections. not just one. The first cons ists of primary
elections des igned to choose each party's nominee,
the second is the genera l election that picks the winner who wi ll hold office. If you are running for president, some states, such as Iowa, hold caucuses
instead of primary elections. A ca ucus is a meeting of
people, often in an auditorium or church basemen t,
where they vote on who they would like their party's
nominee to be.
Each election or caucus attracts a different mix of
voters. What may help you win a primary or a caucus
may be very different from what will help you win the
genera l election. To win a primary or a caucus you
must mobilize po litical activists who will give money,
do volunteer work, and attend local caucuses. As we
saw in Chapters 7 and 8, activists are more ideologica lly stringent than the voters at large. To motivate
these activists you must be more libera l (if you are a
Democrat) in your tone and theme than are rankand-file Democrats. or more conservative (if you are a
Republican) than are rank-and-fi le Repub licans.
Consider the caucuses held in Iowa in early February of a presidentia l election year. This is the first
real test of the candidates vying for the nomination.
Anyone who does poorly here is at a disadvantage, in
terms of media attention and contributor interest,
for the rest of the campaign.
The severa l thousand Iowans who participate in
their parties' caucuses are not representative of the
followers of their party in the state, much less nationally. In 1988 Senator Robert Do le came in fLrst and
evangelist Pat Robertson came in second in the Iowa
Repu blican caucus, with Vice President George Bush
finishing third. As it turned out, there was little support for Dole or Robertson in the rest of the country.
Democrats who participate in the Iowa caucus
tend to be more liberal than Democrats genera lly. 5
Moreover, the way the caucuses are run is a far cry
from how most elections are held. To vote in the
Republican caucus, you need not prove you are a

237

238

Chapter 1 0

Elections and Campai gns

HOW THINGS WORK

Qualifications for Entering Congress and
Privileges of Being in Congress
Qualifications

Representative
• Must be twenty-five years of age (when seated,
not when elected)
• Must have been a citizen of the United States for
seven years
• Must be an inhabitant of the state f rom wh ich
elected (Note : Custom, but not the Constitution,
requires that a representative live in the d istrict
that he or she represents.)

Senator
• Must be t hirty yea rs of age (when seat ed, not
when elected)
• Must have been a citi zen of the Un ited States for
nine years
• Must be an inhabitant of the st ate f rom wh ich
elected
Judging Qualifications
Each house is the judge of the "elections, returns,
and qual ifications" of its members. Th us Congress
alone can decide disputed congressional elections.
On occasion it has excluded a person from taking a
seat on the grounds that the election was imprope r.

Republican or even a voter. The Democratic caucus is
not an election at all; instead a person supporting
a certain candidate stands in one corner of the
room with people who also support him, while those
supporting other candidates stand in other corners
with other groups. There is a lot of call ing back and
forth, intended to persuade people to leave one group
and join another. No group with fewer than 15 percent of the people in attendance gets to choose any
delegates, so people in these small groups then go to
other, larger ones. It is a cross between musical
chairs and fraternity pledge week.
Suppose you are a Democrat running for president and you do well in the Iowa caucus. Suppose
you go on to win your party's nomination. ow you

Either house can punish a member-by reprimand,
for example-or, by a two-thirds vote, expel a member.
Privileges
Members of Congress have certain privileges, the
most important of which, conferred by the Constitution, is that " for any speech or debate in either house
they shall not be questioned in any other place." This
doctrine of "privileged speech " has been interpreted
by the Supreme Court to mean that members of Congress cannot be sued or prosecuted for anything that
they say or write in connection with their legislative
duties.
When Senator Mike Gravel read the Pentagon
Papers-some then-secret government documents
about the Vietnam War- into the Congressional
Record in defiance of a court order restraining their
publ ication, the Court held that this was " privileged
speech" and beyond challenge [Gravel v. United
States, 408 U.S. 606 (1972)] . But when Senator William
Proxm ire issued a press release critical of a scientist
doing research on monkeys, the Court decided that
the scientist could sue him for libel because a press
release was not pa rt of the legislative process
[Hutchinson v. Proxmire, 443, U.S. 111 (1979)] .

have to go back to Iowa to campaign for votes in the
general election. Between 1940 and 2004 Iowa has
voted Republican in every presidential election but
six (1948 , 1964, 1988, 1992, 1996, and 2000).
Your Republican opponent is not going to let you forget all of the liberal slogans you uttered nine months
before. The Repu blican candidate faces the mirror
image of this problem- sounding very conservative
to get support from Republican activists in states
such as Massachusetts and ew York and then having to defend those speeches when running against
his Democratic opponent in those states.
The problem is not limited to Iowa but exists in
every state where activists are more ideologically
polarized than the average voter. To get activist sup-

Primary Versu s Gel1era l Campaigl1 s
port for the nomination, candidates move to the ideological extremes; to win the general election. th ey
try to move back to the ideological center. The typical
voter looks at the resu lts a nd often decides that neither candi date appeals to him or her very much , a nd
so casts a "clothespin vote" (see the box on this page).
Early in the 2004 pres idential caucuses and primaries, John Kerry cl aimed that he was an opponent
of the America n invas ion of Iraq in order to defeat
Howard Dea n, the Vermont govern or who seemed to
be capturin g the antiwa r vote among Democrats. But
after he won his party 's nomination, Kerry backed
away from an antiwar stance in order to be more
attractive to centri st voters. He had learn ed a lesson
that George McGovern did not understa nd in 19 72 .
McGovern ma intained hi s liberal views on the war in
Vietnam, decriminalizin g marijuana. a nd providing
amnesty for draft dodgers. 6 His opponent, Richard
Nixon, defeated him easily by taking more centrist
pOS iti ons.

Clothespin Vote

The vote cast by a person who does not like either
candidate and so votes for the less objectionable
of the two, putting a clothespin over his or her
nose to keep out th e unpleasant stench .

Two Kinds of Campaign Issues
In election ca mpaigns th ere a re two different kinds of
issues. 7 A position issu e is one in which the rival
candidates have opposing views on a question that .
also divides the voters. For example. in the 2004 election George W. Bush wa nted to let people put some of
their Social Security money into private sav in gs
accounts: John Kerry opposed this.
Since 1860 many of the great party rea lignments
have been based on differing position issues. After the
Civil War the question was whether African Americans shou ld be slaves or free. In the 189 0s it was
wheth er ta riffs shou ld be high or low a nd whether
the doll ar should be made cheaper. In the 19 60s it
was whether broad new civil rights legislation was
needed.
But sometimes voters are not divided on importa nt issues. Instead the qu estion is whether a candi date fully supports the public's view on a matter
about which nearly everyone agrees. These are called
va le nce issu es. For exa mple, everybody wants a
strong economy and low crime rates, a nd so no ca ndidate favors high un employment or more crime.
What voters look for on va lence issu es is which candidate seems most closely linked to a universa lly
shared view.
Valence issues a re quite common. In 19 68
Richard ixon seemed to be more supportive of anticrime measures than his rival; in 1976 Jimmy Car ter
seemed more likely to favor honesty in government

239

tha n his opponent; in 1984 Ronald Reaga n seemed
more closely identified with a strong economy tha n
hi s opponen t: in 19 88 George H.W. Bush seemed
more closely linked to patriotism th a n his opponent.
Notice th at we have said "seemed." This is how voters
perceived the winners; it does not mea n th at the
opponents favored crime. corruption . unemployment. or a nti-Americani sm.
In 1992 Bill Clinton was beset with cha rges that
he was gui lty of dodgin g the dra ft. marital infidelity.
a nd smoking pot. But his strategists decided to focus
the campaign on the valence issue of the economy,
and they went about rescuing Cli nton from the other
criticisms. One observer later repor ted, "Retooli ng the
image of a couple who had alrea dy been in the public
eye for fi ve battering months required a ca mpaign of

position issu es

An issue about which the public is divided and rival candidates or po liti cal
parties adopt different pol icy positions .
vale nce issu e An issue about whi ch th e publi c
is united and riva l candidates or political parties adopt sim ilar posit ions in hopes that each
w ill be t houg ht to best represent th ose w idely
shared belief s.

240

Chapter 10

Elections and Campaigns

T ·H·I,V, I,A
.......................

Elections
Only two men to have been
elected president by the House
of Representatives after failing
to win a majority in the electoral college

Thomas Jefferson (1800) and
John Quincy Adams (1824)

Only Democratic senator to
be the running mate of a
Republican presidential
candidate

Andrew Johnson (1864)

Candidates for president who
received more popular votes
than their opponents but were
not elected

Grover Cleveland and AI Gore
got more popular votes but
fewer electoral votes than their
opponents

President who won the largest
percentage of the popular vote

Lyndon B. Johnson, 61 .7 percent
(1964)

Only person to serve as vice
president and president without
having been elected to either
post

Gerald Ford (1973-1976)

President who won the most
electoral votes

Ronald Reagan (525 in 1984)

First woman to run for national
office on a major-party ticket

Geraldine Ferraro (Democratic
candidate for vice president,
1984)

in importance in recent years . This has happened in
part because presidential campaigns are now conducted large ly on television. where it is important to
project popu lar symbols and manipulate widely
admired im ages. Candidates try to show that they are
likable, and they rely on televised portraits of their
similarity to ordinary people.

Television, Debates, and Direct Mail

behav ior modification and medi a manipulation
so elaborate that its outline ran to fourteen singlespaced pages." 8 Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary.
made joint appearances on television during wh ich
they demonstrated their affection for each other. The
plan even call ed for staging an event where Bill Clinton and hi s daughter would surprise Hillary Clinton
on Mother's Day.9
The 2004 campa ign relied on both valence issues
(Bush and Kerry supported military defense while
differing on how to recruit allies) a nd position issues
(B ush supported his tax cuts while Kerry fa vored
repealing them for people earn ing over $200,000
a year).
Campaigns have usually combined both position
and valence questions , but the lalter have increased

Once campaigns mostly involved parades, big rallies,
"whistle-stop" train tours. a nd shaking ha nds outside
factory gates and near shopping centers. All of this
still goes on. but increaSingly presidential a nd senatorial candidates (a nd those House candidates with television stations in their districts) use broadcasting.
There are two ways to use television- by running
paid advertisements and by getting on the nightly
news broadcasts. In the language of ca mpaigners.
short television ads are called spots, and a campaign
activity that appears on a news broadcast is called a
visual. Much has been written about the preparation
of spots, usually under titles such as "the selling
of the president" or "packaging the candidate" (and
mostly by advertising executives, who are not especially known for underestimating their own inl1uence). No doubt spots can have an important effect in
some cases. A little-known candidate can increase his
or her visib ility by frequent use of spots (this is what
Jimmy Carter did in the 1976 presidential primaries) .
The effect of television advertising on general
elections is probably a good deal less than its effect on
primaries: indeed, as we sha ll see in Chapter 12, most
scientific studies of television's influence on voting
decisions have shown that either it has no effect or
the effect is subtle and hard to detect. or is it surprising that this should be the case. In a general election. espec ially one for a hi gh-v isibility office (such as
president or govern or), the average voter has many
sources of information- his or her own party or ideological preference, various kinds of advertising, the
opinions of friends and fam ily, and newspaper and
magazine stories. Furthermore, both sides will use
TV spots; if well done, they are likely to cancel each
other out. In short, it is not yet clear that a gullible
public is being sold a bill of goods by slick Madison
Avenue advertisers , whether the goods are automobiles or politiCia ns .
Visuals a re a vital part of any major campaign
effort because. unlike spots, they cost the campaign
little and. as "news," they may have greater credibility with the viewer. A visual is a brief. filmed episode

Primary Vers us General Campaigns

241

HOW THINGS WORK
Kinds of Elections
There are two kinds of elections in the United States:
general and primary. A general election is used to fill
an elective office. A primary election is used to select
a party's candidates for an elective office, though in
fact those who vote in a primary election may not
consider themselves party members. Some primaries
are closed . In a closed primary you must declare in
advance (sometimes several weeks in advance) that
you are a registered member of the political party in
whose primary you wish to vote . About forty states
have closed primaries.
Other primaries are open . In an open primary you
can decide when you enter the voting booth which
party's primary you wish to participate in. You are
given every party's ballot; you may vote on one.
Idaho, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, North Dakota,
Utah, Vermont, and Wisconsin have open primaries. A
variant on the open prima ry is the blanket (or "free
love") primary-in the voting booth you mark a ballot that lists the candidates of all the parties, and thus
you can help select the Democratic candidate for one
office and the Republican candidate for another.
Alaska and Washington have blanket primaries .
The differences among these kinds of primaries
should not be exaggerated, for even the closed pri mary does not create any great barrier for a voter
who wishes to vote in the Democratic primary in one
election and the Republican in another. Some states
also have a runoff primary: if no candidate gets a
majority of the votes, there is a runoff between the
two with the most votes. Runoff primaries are common in the South .

general election An election held to choose
which candidate will hold office.
primary election An election held to choose
candidates for office.
closed primary A primary election in which
voting is limited to already registered party
members.
open primary A primary election in which voters may choose in which party to vote as they
enter the poll ing place.

A special kind of primary, a presidential primary, is
that used to pick delegates to the presidential nominating conventions of the major parties. Presidential
primaries come in a bewildering variety. A simplified
list looks like this:
• Delegate selection only Only the names of
prospective delegates to the convention appear
on the ballot. They mayor may not indicate their
presidential preferences.
• Delegate selection with advisory presidential
preference Voters pick delegates and indicate
thei r preferences among presidential candidates.
The delegates are not legally bound to observe
these preferences .
• Binding presidential preference Voters indicate
their preferred presidential candidates. Delegates
must observe these preferences, at least for a certain
number of convention ballots. The delegates may be
chosen in the primary or by a party convention .
In 1981 the Supreme Court ruled that political parties, not state legislatures, have the right to decide
how delegates to national conventions are selected .
Thus Wisconsin could not retain an open primary if
the national Democratic party objected (Democratic
Party v. La Follette, 101 Sup. Ct. 1010, 1981). Now the
parties can insist that only voters who declare themselves Democrats or Republicans can vote in presidential primaries. The Supreme Court's ruling may
have relatively little practical effect, however, since
the "declaration" might occur only an hour or a day
before the election.

blanket primary A primary election in which
each voter may vote for candidates from both
parties.
runoff primary A second primary election held
when no candidate wins a majority of
the votes in the first primary.

242

Chapter 10

Elections and Campaigns

showing the candid ate doing so mething th at a
reporter thinks is newswor thy. Simply making a
speech , unless the speech conta in s important new
facts or charges, is often thought by TV editors to be
uninteresting: telev ision viewers are not attracted by
pictures of "talking heads," and in the highly co mpetitive world of TV, audience reactions a re all-importa nt
determin a nts of what gets on the a ir. Knowing thi s.
campa ign managers will strive to have their candidates do something visually interesting every day, no
later than 3:00 P.M. (if the visu al is to be on the 6:00
P.M . news)- talk to elderly folks in a nursing home.
sha ke han ds with people waiting in an unempl oyment line. or sni ff the waters of a polluted lake. Obviously a ll these efforts are for naught if a TV camera
crew is not around ; great pains are therefore taken to
schedule these visua ls at times and in places that
make it easy for the photog raphers to be present.
IronicalJy. visua ls- a nd television newscasts generally- may give the viewer less information than commercial spots. This, of course, is the exact opposite of
what many peopl e believe. It is commonplace to
deplore political advertising, especially the short spot.
on the grounds that it is either devoid of information
or manipulative, and to praise telev ision news programs, especially longer debates a nd in terv iews.
because they are informative and ba lanced. In fact the
best research we have so far suggests that the reverse
is true: news programs covering elections tend to convey very little information (they often show scenes of
crowds cheering or candidates shouting sloga ns) a nd
make little or no impression on viewers, if indeed they
are watched at a Ll. Paid commercials, on the other
hand, especially the shorter spots. often contain a good
deal of information that is seen , remembered, a nd
eva luated by a public that is quite capable of distinguishing between fact and humbug.lO
A specia l kind of telev ision campa igning is the
campaign debate. Incumbents or well-known ca ndidates have little incentive to debate their opponents;
by so doing. they only give more publi city to lesserknown rivals. Despite the general rul e among politicians never to help a n opponent, Vice Presid ent
Jixon debated the less-well-know n John Kennedy in
1960, and President Gerald Ford debated the lesswell-known Jimmy Ca rter in 1976. Nixon and Fo rd
lost. Ly nd on Johnson would not debate Ba rry Go ld water in 19 64. nor wo uld Nixon debate Humphrey
in 1968 or McGovern in 1972. Johnson a nd ixon
wo n. Ca rter debated the equally well-known Reagan
in 1980 (but refused to join in a three-way debate

with Reaga n a nd John Anderson). Car ter lost. It is
hard to know what effect TV debates have on election
outcomes, but poll data suggest that in ] 980 voters
who watched the debates were reassured by Reaga n's
performance; after the second debate with Carter. he
took a lea d in the polls that he never relinquished.] I
In 1984 most people thought that Mond a le did better tha n Reaga n in the first debate. but there is littl e
ev idence that the debate a ffected the outcome of the
election. In 199 2 and 1996 Clinton was pro bably the
better debater. but he most likely would have wo n
even if he had stumbled.
In 20 04 George W. Bush and John F. Kerry held
three telev ised debates. Op inions diffe r as to who did
better, but th ere is li ttle evidence that these encounters affected the election res ults.
Though TV visu als and debates are free. they are
also risky. The risk is the sli p of the tongue. You may
h ave spent thirty yea rs of your life in unbl emished
public service. yo u may have thought th ro ugh your
position on the issues with great care, you may h ave
rehearsed your speeches until your dog sta rts to
howl. but just make one verbal blunder and suddenly the whole campa ign focuses on your misstep.
In 1976 President Ford er roneously implied that
Pola nd was not part of the Soviet bloc. For days th e
press dwelt on this slip. His opponent, Jimmy Car ter.
admitted in a Playboy inter view that he had sometimes had lust in his heart. It is hard to imagine anyone who bas not, but apparently pres idents a re
supposed to be above that sor t of thing. In 1980
Rona ld Reaga n sa id th at trees cause pollutionoops, here we go aga in .
Because of the fear of a sli p, because the voters do
not want to hear long, fact-fill ed speeches about complex issues, a nd because general-election campaigns
are fights to attract the centrist voter, the candidates
will rely on a stock speech th at sets out the campaign
theme as well as on their ability to strin g together
several proven appl a use-getting lines. For reporters
covering the candid ate every day, it ca n be a mindnumbing experi ence. Nelso n Rockefell er spoke so
often of the "brotherhood of man a nd the fatherhood
of God" that the reporters started referring to it as his
BOMFOG speech. Occasionally this pattern is interrupted by a "major" address-that is, a carefully co mposed talk on some critica l issue, usua lly delivered
before a live a udience a nd designed to prov ide issuerelated stories for the repor ters to write.
If yo u dislike campaign oratory. put yo urself in
the ca ndid ate 's shoes for a moment. Every wo rd yo u

Primary Versus General Campaigns

say will be scrutinized, especially for slips of the
tongue. Interest group lea ders and party activists
will react sharply to any phrase that departs from
their prefer red policies. Your opponent sta nds ready
to pounce on a ny error of fact or judgment. You must
give countless speeches every day. The ration al reaction to this state of affairs is to avoid controversy,
stick to prepared texts a nd tested phrases, and shun
anything that sound s ori ginal (a nd hence untested).
You therefore wind up trying to sell yourself as much
as or more than your ideas . Voters may say that they
admire a blunt. outspoken perso n, but in a tough
political ca mpaign they would probably find such
bluntn ess a little unnerving.
Telev ision is the most visible example of modern
technology's effect on campaigns. Since 1960 presidential elections have been contested largely through
telev ision. Without telev ision the campaign waged in
1992 by independent candidate Ross Perot might not
have ha ppened at all. Perot la unched hi s candid acy
with successive appea ra nces on Cable News Network's call-in program "Larry King Live," and he
bought several half-hour chunks of television time to
air his views on the federa l budget deficit. In early
October, before the first of three televised debates
featuring Perot, Republi can incumbent George H.W.
Bush, and Democratic cha llenger Bill Clinton, most
national polls showed Perot with only 10 percent of
the vote. But after the debates Perot's support in the
polls doubled, and he ended up with about 19 percent of the votes cast on election day.
In 1996 the big telev ision networks agreed to
make so me free televis ion time available to the major
presidential candidates. The Federal Co mmunications Commission approved the plan to limit the free
TV to "major" candidates, thus denying it to minor
third-party nominees.
Less visible than televis ion but perhaps just as
important is the Internet. The compu ter makes possible sophisticated direct-mail campaigning, and this
in turn makes it possible for a candidate to address
specific appea ls to particular voters eas ily and rapidly so licit campaign contributions. In the 2004 presidential campaign Vermont Governor Howard Dean,
at first a largely unknown person, raised a huge
amount of money from In ternet appeals in which he
emphasized his opposition to our war in Iraq. Other
candidates will no doubt do the same. However, the
In ternet lends itself to id eological appeals that motivate small contributions. a nd not every ca ndidate
will want to make such arguments.

243

[n the 1888 presidelltial cmnprrigl1 , supporters of Benjrrmin
Hrrrrisol1 rolled rr huge ball covered with cml1prrigl1 slogrrns rrcross
the cou l/try. Tir e gillll1rick, Jirst IIsed il11 840, gave rise to tire
phmse "keep tire l)(lll rolling."

Whereas television is heard by everybody-and
thus leads the candidate using it to speak in generalities to avoid offending anyone-direct mail is aimed at
particular groups (college students, ative Americans,
bankers, a utoworkers), to whom specific views can be

Crrl1didates first I1wde phonogmphic recordings of their speeches
ill 1908. Wrrrrell G. Hardi llg is shown here recording rr speech
during the 1920 m mpaign.

244

Chapter 10

Elections and Campaigns

John F. Kennedy and Richard Nixon debate du ring the 1960 presidential
cmnpai{!n.

expressed with much less risk of offending someone.
So impor ta nt are the lists of names of potentia l contributors to whom a computer may send appeals that
a prized resource of any candidate, gu arded as if it
were a military secret. is "The List. " Novices in politics
mu st slowly develop their own lists or beg sympathetic
incumbents for a peek at theirs.
The chief consequence of the new style of campaigning is not, as some think, that it is more ma nipulative than old-style campaigning (picnics with free
beer and $5 bills handed to voters ca n be just as
ma nipulative as TV ads) ; rather it is that running
campaigns has become divorced from the process of
governing. Prev iously the party leaders who ra n
the campaigns would take part in the government
once it was elected, and since they were party leaders,
they had to worry about getting their candidate
reelected. Modern political consultants take no responsibility for governing, and by th e time the next election
rolls around, they may be worki ng for someone else.

~

Money

All these consultan ts, TV ads. a nd computerized
mailings cost money- lots of it. A powerful Ca lifornia politician once obser ved that "money is the
mother 's mil k of politics." a nd ma ny people think

that our democra cy is drowning in it. Tn 200 2 winnin g House and Sen ate ca ndid ates spent a combin ed
total of over half a billion dollars (see Figure 10.1 ).
When that kind of money is spent. many peopl e will
cynically conclude that elections a re being bou ght
a nd sold. Clever television producers are bein g paid
huge sums. so the theory goes, to pu t on TV ad s that
sell candidates as if they were boxes of soa p.
But matters are a good dea l more complicated a nd
less sinister than the popula r theory supposes.
Mo ney is importa nt in politics as in everythin g else,
but it is not obvious that the candid ates with th e
most money always win or that the donors of the
mon ey buy big favors in excha nge for their big bucks.
In Chapter 11 we will consider what, if a nythin g.
interest groups get for the money they give to politicians, a nd in Chapter 12 we shall summa rize wh at
we kn ow about the effects of television adverti sing
on elections. Here let us try to a nswer four question s:
Where does ca mpaign money come from ? What
rules govern how it is raised and spent? What has
been the effect of campaign fina nce reform ? What
does campaign spending buy?

The Sources of Campaign Money
Presidential ca ndidates get pa rt of their money from
private donors a nd part from the federa l government:
congressional ca ndidates get all of their money from

245

MOlley

Figure 10.1

The Cost of Winning

450 r-

400 -

_

Hou se

_

Senate

r--

350 _ 300 -

r--

VJ

r--

c

.2

~ 250 -

1.-

r--

~

c

:; 200 J§

100 -

r""""l

r""""l

"o 150 -

~

-

r-r""""l

50 -

l
1982

.,---

Il Il
1984

1986

1988

1990

1-'

"-

1992

1994

-

1-

1996

1998

2000

2002

Source: Updated from Federal Election Comm ission Report, May 15, 2001 .

al election the government pays all the costs of each
candidate, up to a limit set by law (in 2004 that limi t
was $74.4 mUlion for each major candidate).
Congressional candidates get no government funds;
all their money must come out of their own pockets or
be raised from individuals, interest groups (PACs) ,
or the political parties. Contrary to what many people
think most of that money comes-and has always
come-from individual donors (see Table 10.2).
Because the rules sharply limit how much any individual can give, these donors tend not to be fat cats but
people of modest means who contribute $100 or $200
per person.

private sources. In the presidential primaries, candidates raise money from private citizens and interest
groups. The federa l government will provide matching funds . dollar for dollar, for a ll monies raised from
individual donors who contr ib ute no more than
$250. Since every ca ndidate wants as much of this
"free" federa l money as possible, each has an incentive to raise money from sma ll , individual givers. (To
prove they are serious cand idates, they must first
raise $5 ,000 in each of twenty states from such
small contributors.) The government also gives a
lump-sum grant to each political party to help pay
the costs of its nominating convention. In the gener-

Senate Candidates in

Sources
Individuals
Democrats
Republi ca ns
PACs
Democrats
Republicans

Incumbents

Challengers

Open Seats

$132.7
125.5

$47 .1
44.1

$40.2
55.8

93 .2
100.1

13.6
8.8

14.5
20.0

Source: Calculated from Harold W. Stanley and Richard G. Niemi, Vital Statistics on American Politics,
2003-2004 (Washington, D.c.: Cong ressional Quarterly Press, 2003), Table 2.6.

246

Chapter 10

Figure 10.2

Elections and Campaigns

Growth of PACs

-

Corporate

-

Trade/ Membership/Hea lth

-

Nonconnected (Ideologica l)

_

Labor

-

Other

2,000

1,500
if>

U

«

a..
'0
Q;

1.000

D

E
::J

Z

500

1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Source: Federal Election Com mission.

Since the typical individua l contribution is very
sma ll (and in no case larger than $2,000), some candidates have turned to rock bands and movie stars to
put on benefit performances. If five thousand people
wi ll each pay $75 for a performance by U2. a lot of
money can be raised in a hurry.
The most a PAC can give a candid ate in a ny election is $5.000. but the typica l PAC does not donate
a nything approaching the maximum amount; usua lly it gives a few hundred dollars to each ca ndid ate
it supports.
These figures conceal some important differences
among kinds of candidates. however. As Table 10.2
shows. incumbent members of Congress running for
reelection get over half of their money from PACs and
spend next to nothing from loans. Their challengers. by
contrast. spend only half as much and are able to get
only one-eighth of that from PACs. Challengers have to
borrow much more money. As we shall see in the next
section. these money problems weaken the ability of
cha llengers to mount effective campaigns. Three states.
Arizona. Maine. a nd Vermont. now fund campaigns
with public money. but there is as yet no solid evidence
about what difference it makes. or how.

Campaign Finance Rules
Du ri ng the 1972 presidentia I election . men hired by
Presid ent ixon 's campaign staff broke into the
headquarters of the Democratic Nationa l Committee

in the Watergate office buildin g. They were ca ught
by an alert security guard. The subsequent investigation disclosed that the Nixon people had engaged in
dubious or illega l money-ra ising schemes. includ ing
taking large su ms from wealthy co ntributors in
exchange [or appointing them to ambassadorships.
Many individua ls and corporations were indicted for
making illegal donations (since 1925 it had been
agai nst the law for corporations or labor unions to
contribute money to candidates. but the law had
been unenforceable). Some of the accused had given
money to Democratic candidates as well as to Nixon.
When the break-in was discovered. the Watergate
scandal unfolded. It had two political results: Pres ident Nixon was forced to resign. and a new campaign finance law was passed.
Under the new law. individuals could not contribute more than $1.000 to a candid ate during any
sin gle election. Corporations and labor unions had
for many decades been prohibited from spending
money on ca mpaigns. but the new law created a
substitute: political action committees (PACs) . A PAC
mu st have at least fifty members (a ll of whom enroll
voluntarily). give to at least five federal ca ndid ates.
a nd must not give more than $5.000 to a ny candidate in a ny election or more tha n $15.000 per yea r
to any political party.
In addition. the law made federal tax money available to help pay for presidential primary ca mpa igns

Mon ey

247

HOW THINGS WORK
Major Federal Campaign Finance Rules
General

Ban on Soft Money

• All federal election contributions and expenditures
are reported to a Federal Election Commission .
• All contributions over $100 must be disclosed, w ith
name, address, and occupation of contributor.
• No cash contributions over $100 or foreign
contr ibutions.
• No ceiling on how much candidates may spend out
of their own money (unless t hey accept federal
funding for a pres idential race).

• No corporation or union may give money from its
own treasury to any national political party.

Individual Contributions
• An individual may not give more than $2,000 to
any candidate in any election .
• An individua l may not make fede ral political gifts
exceeding $95,000 every two years, of which only
$37,500 may go to candidates .
Political Action Committees (PACs)
• Each corporation, union, or association may establish one.
• A PAC must register six months in adva nce, have at
least fifty contributors, and give to at least f ive
cand idates.
• PAC contributions may not exceed $5,000 per can didate per election, or $15,000 to a national pol it ical party.

and for paying all of the campaign costs of a majorparty candidate and a fraction of the costs of a minorparty candidate in a presidential general election.
The new law helped increase the amount of
money spent on elections a nd. in time, changed the
way money was spent. There are now more than four
thousand PACs (see Figure 10.2). In 2002 they gave
over $25 0 mi ll ion to congressional ca ndidates. But
PACs are not a dominant influen ce on candidates
because they in fact give rather little (often no more
than $500). A small co ntributi on is enough to
ensure that a phone ca ll to a member of Congress
from a PAC sponsor wil l be returned but not enough,

Independent Expenditures
• Corporations, unions, and associations may not
use their own money to fund " electioneering communications " that refer to clearly identified candidates sixty days before a general election or thirty
days before a primary contest.
• PACs may fund electioneering communications up
to their expenditure limits.
Presidential Primaries
• Federal matching funds can be given to match
individual contributions of $250 or less.
• To be eligible, a candidate must raise $5,000 in
each of twenty states in contributions of $250
or less.
Presidential Election
• The federal government will pay all campa ign
costs (up to a legal li mit) of major-pa rty cand idates
and part of the cost of minor-party candidates
(those winn ing between 5 and 25 percent of the
vot e) .

in most cases, to guarantee that the member will act
as the PAC wishes.
Moreover, most money for congressional candidates still comes from individuals. But since the limit
until 2002 was $1.000 per election (a limit set in the
early 19 70s), ca ndidates had to devise clever ways of
reaching a lot of individuals in order to raise the
amount of money they needed . This usually mea nt
direct mail and telephone solicitations. If you are
bothered by constant appeals for campaign fund s,
remember- that's what the law requires.
By contrast, when George McGovern ran against
Richard Nixon in 19 72 , he was chiefly supported by

248

Chapter 10

Elections and Campaigns

The 2004 Election
The 2004 election revealed an electorate as deeply
divided as it was in 2000. But unlike 2000, when
Bush won fewer popular votes than Al Gore and
the contest did not end until after a long recount in
Florida and a major Supreme Court decision, Bush
in 2004 won many more popular votes than did
John Kerry, carried Florida without any chance of
a recount, and obtained 286 electoral votes.
With only a few exceptions, Bush and Kerry in
2004 won the same states that Bush and Gore had
won in 2000. There were three differences: Kerry
won New Hampshire and Bush carried Iowa and
New Mexico. The similarity between the two elections has led people to refer to "Red states" that
Republicans carry and "Blue states" that the Democrats win. In the map on page 249, we show the split
between Red and Blue coul/ties rather than states
because in many Red and Blue states the opponent
won several counties. The Democrats dominate New
England, the bigger cities in the Midwest, and the
coastal areas on California, Oregon, and Washington; the Republicans carried almost everything else.
Bush was helped by the assignment of electoral
votes to the states following the 2000 Census. In
2004 he gained seven more electoral votes by carrying the same states he had won in 2000.
In 2004 we were at war in Iraq. Though we had
easily conquered the country from the Saddam
Hussein dictatorship, dissident elements in Iraq kept
relentlessly attacking American troops as well as
other foreigners and members of the new Iraq government. American experience over many decades
has shown that though the public wi ll support a
war, that backing weal<ens when we seem stalemated. Moreover, many Kerry supporters never wanted
us to fight in Iraq at all and deeply distrusted Bush
because they thought him to be "too religious."
John Kerry had his own troubles. ot only was he
trying to unseat a president during wartime, his own
experiences as a naval officer in Vietnan1 became
controversial. A group of naval veterans (the "Swift
Boat Veterans for Truth") with experience in Vietnam
attacked him for not having won his medals fairly
and for his having bitterly criticized the American
military in testimony he gave to the Congress after
his return. For many weeks, the only campaign issue
seemed to be whether Kerry had behaved honorably.

The campaign was especially in tense, leading
to a very high turnout. Almost 60 percent of the
voting-age population cast ballots, the highest
since 1968. The big increase in the number of registered voters and the massive get-out-the-vote
drives probably helped Bush more than Kerry. In
every state but two (South Dakota and Vermont),
Bush increased his share of the vote over what he
had received four years earlier.
Bush won the votes of men, whites, conservatives, Protestants, married coup les, the especially
religious, military veterans, gun owners, strong
critics of abortion, voters deeply concerned about
the war against terrorism, opponents of same-sex
marriages, and people worried about taxes and
moral va lues and who approved of Bush's tax
cuts. Kerry won a majority of the votes of women,
blacks, liberals, union members, Jews, unmarried
voters, secularists, gays, people favoring same-sex
marriages, strong supporters of abortion, opponents of our war in Iraq, and people who worried
about education and the economy and were critics
of the tax cuts.
If there was anyone decisive issue, it was voters'
concerns about terrorism and national security.
Opponents of the war in Iraq supported Kerry, but
for people who worried about terrorism, the overwhelming majority supported Bush.
In the struggle to control Congress, the Republicans did better than the Democrats, increasing
their majority in the House by at least three seats
and in the Senate by four seats. In the Senate campaigns, the Republicans increased their hold on
the South by winning seats in Louisiana, Georgia,
and orth and South Carolina. Perhaps the
Republicans' most dramatic win was the defeat of
Senate minority leader Tom Daschle of South
Dakota. He had served in Congress for over a quarter of a century, but lost to John Thune.
People paid a great deal of attention to the 2004
election. When pollsters asked the voters if they
were "very interested " in the election, a higher percentage said "yes" than in any election since at
least 1996. In 1996 and 2000,17 percent of the
voters made up their minds just a few days before
the election; in 2004, only 6 percent waited that
long. 12

Money

J:

wrn
f-:::l

om
>

u.>

00:
1-'0:

uw

a.~

~

c:

::::s

o

u

~
.,;
o
o

N

o
c:
o
"';::;
u

Q)

w
Q)

.c:
f-

?f

0
I"-

~
0

0

en

I

Q)

F

24 9

250

Chapter 10

Elections al1(l Campaigns

the large contributions of one wealthy donor, and
when Eugene McCarthy ran against Lyndon Johnson
in 1968, he benefited from a few big donations and
did not have to rely on massive fund-raising appeals.
Pres idential candidates are treated differently
than congressional candidates. The former may get
money directly from the federal government. In the
primary campaign, candidates can receive matching
funds. Any candidate who raises at least $5,000 in
individual contributions of $250 or less from people
living in twenty states is eligible for matching funds.
Once eligib le, a candidate gets federa l money to
match, dollar for dollar, what he or she h as raised in
contributions of $250 or less. But a presidential candidate can decide to forgo federa l primary fu nding
and raise his or her own money. In 2000 George W.
Bush relied entirely on his own fund-ra ising, while
his chief rival, John McCain, used fede ral matching
funds. In 2004 Bush, Kerry, and Dean all declined
federal matching funds in the primary elections.
If you are a minor-party candidate, you can get
some support from the federa l government provided
you have won at least 5 percent of the vote in the
last election. In 2000. both Pat Buchanan (Reform
party) and Ralph Nader (Green party) got partial
support from Washington because their parties had
won more than 5 percent of the vote in 1996. But
th is time out, neither party won that much, and so
Nader did not get federa l support in 2004.
The 1973 campaign finance law produced two
prob lems. The first was ind e pe ndent expe nditures. A PAC, a corporation, or a labor union cou ld
spend whatever it wanted supporting or opposing a
candidate, so long as this spend ing was "independent," that is, not coordinated with or made at the
direction of the candidate's wishes. Simply put, independent expend itures are ordinary advertising that i s
directed at or against candidates.
The second was soft money. Under the law, individuals, corporations, labor unions. and oth er

independent expenditures Spending by political action committees, corporations, or labor
unions that is done to help a party or candidate but is done independently of them.
soft money Funds obtained by political parties
that are spent on pa rty activities, such as getout-t he-vot e drives, but not on behalf of a speci fic candidate.

groups could give un li mited amounts of money to
political parties provided the mo ney was not used to
back candidates by name, But the money cou ld be
used in ways that helped candidates by financing
voter-registration and get-out-the-vote drives. Over
half a billion dollars in soft money was spent during
the 2000 presidential campaign.

A Second Campaign Finance Law
Reform is a tricky word. We like to think it means
fixing something that has gone wrong. But some
reforms can make matters worse. For example, the
campaign finance re forms enacted in the ear ly
19 70s helped matters in some ways by ensuring that
all campaign contributors would be identified by
name. But they made things worse in other ways by,
fo r example, requ iring candidates to raise small sums
from many donors. This made it harder for ch allengers to run (incumbents are much better known
and raise more money) and easier for wea lthy candidates to run because, under the law as interpreted by
the Supreme Court, candidates can spend as much of
the ir own money as they want.
After the 2000 campaign, a strong movement
developed in Congress to re form the reforms of the
1970s. The result was the Bipartisan Campa ign
Finance Reform Act of 2002, which passed easily in
the House and Senate and was signed by President
Bush.
The law made three important changes. First, it
banned "soft money" contributions to national political parties from corporations and unions. After
th e federal elections in 2002, no national party or
party committee can accept soft money. Any money
the national parties get must come from "hard
money"-that is, individual donations or PAC contr ibutions as limited by federal law.
Second, the limit on individu al contributions was
raised from $1,000 per candidate per election to
$2,000.
Third, "independent expenditures" by corporations , labor un ions, trade associations , and (under
certain circumstances) nonprofit organizations are
sharply restricted. Now none of these organizations
can use their own money to refer to a clearly iden tified federa l candid ate in any advertisement during
the Sixty days preceding a general election or the
thirty days preceding a primary contest. (PACs can
still refer to candidates in their ads, but of course
PACs are restricted to "hard money"- that is, the
amount they can spend under federal law.)

Money

The Florida Vote-Count Controversy
The presidential election of 2000 was decided in
favor of George W. Bush on December 12 , 2000,
when the U.S. Supreme Co urt suspend ed the
counting of disputed ballots in Florida as ordered
by the Florida Supreme Co urt. When the reco unting was halted, Bush was a head by 537 votes. But
wou ld Bush have won Florida and the election
a nyway?
According to an exhaustive nine-month analysis of 175,010 Florida ba llots conducted by eight
media organizations in 2001 with the help of the
ational Opinion Research Center (NORC) at the
University of Chi cago, the answer is yes. The
analysis suggested that if the U.S. Supreme Court
had allowed the vote counting ordered by the Florida Supreme Court to continue, Bush still would
have won Florida by 49 3 votes , rather than by 537
votes. Likewise, the analysis suggested that if Al
Gore had won his original req uest for hand counts
in just four heavily Democratic Florida counties,
Bush would have won by 225 votes.
But the controversy was hardly settled by these
results. For one thing, the NORC study also suggested that a majority of Florida voters who went
to the polls on November 7. 2000, went intending
to vote for Gore, but thousands more Gore than

Immed iately after th e law was signed. critics filed
sui t in federal court claiming that it was unconstitutiona l. The suit brought together a number of organizat ions that rare ly work together. such as the
American Civil Liberties Union and the National
Right to Life Committee.
The suit's central ar guments are that the ban on
independent spending that "refers to" clearly identifi ed ca ndid ates sixty days before an election is unconstitutional because it is an abrid gement of the right
of free speech. nder the law. a n organization need
not even endorse or oppose a ca ndid ate; it is enough
that it mention a politician. This means that an
organization, sixty days before an election. cannot
say that it "supports (or opposes) a bill proposed by
Congress man Hastert."
ews papers, magazines, and radio and television
sta tions are not affected by the law, so that they can

Bush voters failed to cast their ba llots for their
favorite ca ndidate because of mistakes engendered
by co nfU Sing ballots. For another, the NORC
study's findings further indicated that. had the ballots been reco unted using the exacting "eq ual protection " standard that the US. Supreme Co urt
ruled was constitutiona lly necessary but that was
impossible to complete given lega l time limits, Gore
probably would have won.
The US. Supreme Court's flve-to-four decision in
BLish II. Gore was hotly debated at the time it was
a nnounced, and it has only grown more controversial since. Even some conservative Republicans
who wanted Bush to win have criticized not only
the Florid a Supreme Court for exte nding the
recounts, but the US. Supreme Co urt's majority
for deciding the issue as it did. They would have
preferred the Florid a Supreme Court to do nothing
except uphold the state's vote reco unt law and,
failing that, the U. S. Supreme Court to allow Congress to decid e the matter as the Constitution
seems to require.
Sources: Jackie Calmes and Edward P Foldessy, "Florida Revisited:
Bush Wins Without Su preme Co urt Help," Wall Street Journal
(November 2001 ); E.J. Dionne and Wil liam J. Kristol, eds., Bush v.
Gore (Washington, D.C Brookings Institution, 2001).

say whatever they want for or aga inst a ca ndidate.
One way of eva luating the law is to observe th at it
shifts influence away from businesses and unions
and toward the media.
The Supreme Co urt decided to uphold almost all
of the law, As we saw in Ch apter 5, it rejected the
argument of those who claimed that speech requires
money and decid ed it was no violation of the free
speech prov isions of the First Amend ment to eliminate the ab ili ty of corporations and labor unions
(and the organizations th at use their money) to even
mention a ca ndidate for federal office for sixty days
before the national election.

New Sources of Money
If money is, indeed, the mother's milk of politics,
efforts to make the money go away are not likely to
work. The Bipartisan Campa ign Reform Act. once

251

252

Chapter 10

Elections and Campaigns
Under the law. as it is now interpreted. 527 organizations ca n spend their money on politics so long as
they do not coordin ate with a ca ndidate or lobby
directly for that person. In 2004 , 527 organizations
raised and spent over one-third of a billion doll ars. So
far the lesson seems to be this: ca mpaign fina nce
laws are not likely to take money out of politics.

Money and Winning

Senators John McCain and Russell Feingold wrote the campaign finan ce reform act that passed in 2002.

enforced, immediately stimulated people to find other
ways to spend political money.
The most common were 527 organ iza tions.
These groups, named after a provision of the Internal Revenue Code, are designed to permit the kind of
soft money expend itures once made by political parties. In 2004 the Democrats created the Media Fund ,
A m erica Coming Together, America Votes , and many
other groups. George Soros, the wea lthy busin essman, gave over $23 million to organizations pledged
to defeat George Bush. The Republicans responded
by creating Progress for A m erica, The Leadership
Forum, America for Job Security, and other groups.

527 organizations Orga nizat ions th at , und er
sectio n 527 of t he Intern al Revenue Code, raise
and spend money t o advance po liti cal ca uses.

In the ge nera l election for presid ent. money does not
make mu ch difference, because both major-party
ca ndid ates have the same a mount, contributed by
the federa l government. During peacetime, presidential election s are usually decided by three things:
po litical party affili ation. the state of the economy.
a nd the character of the cand idates.
For a ll the ta lk about voting for "the person , not
the party," history teaches that at least 80 percent of
the presidentia l vote will go to the ca ndid ates of the
two ma in parties. This mea ns that a presidential election wi ll normally be decided by the 20 percent of
voters who cannot be counted on to vote eith er
Democratic or Repub lican.
In good economic times the party hold ing the
White House normally does well ; in poor times it does
bad ly. This is sometimes ca lled the "pocketbook
vote." But it is not clear whose pocketbook determines how a person will vote. Many people who are
doin g well financia lly will vote aga inst the party in
power if the country as a whole is not doing well. A
person who is doing well may have friends or fami ly
members who are doing poorly. Or the well-off voter
may think that if the country is doing poorly, he or
she will soon feel the pinch by losin g a job or losing
customers.
Voters also ca re about character, a nd so some
money from presidential campaign coffers goes to
fund "c haracter ads." Character here means several
things: Is the candidate honest and reliable? Does the
can did ate think as the voter thinks about socia l issues
such as crime. abortion. a nd school prayer? Does the
candidate act presidentia l? Acting presidential seems
to mea n being an effective speaker. displaying dignity
and compassion, sounding like someone who can
take charge and get things done, and coming across
consistently as a reasonable. likable person. Rash, disagreeab le extremists need not apply.
Since both major ca ndid ates get the same amount
of federa l money for the genera l-election campai gn.
money does not make much of a difference in deter-

What Decides the Election?

Incumbency Advantage in Congressional Campaign Spending (constant 1992 dollars)

Year

Average Incumbent
Spending

Average Challenger
Spending

Number of Races

Incumbent-to-Chal lenger
Spending Ratio

Median Rati o

1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996

$284,577
$298, 510
$400,630
$417,815
$488,447
$496,894
$479,969
$609,060
$573,374
$630,852

$202,863
$174,031
$202,689
$192,433
$175,418
$148,723
$124,899
$172,802
$223,664
$254,964

235*
338
315
338
319
328
321
307
328
357

1.40
1.72
1.98
2.17
2.78
3.34
3.84
3.52
2.56
2.47

1.93
3.82
3.24
4.47
5.39
7.08
10.02
5.35
4.68
5.11

Total

$473,421

$187,587

2.52

4.66

3,186

'Number of cases is small due to nonfilers.

Source. Stephen Ansolabehere and James Snyder, "The Sources of the Incumbency Advantage in Congressional Campaign Finance,"
Department of Political Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 1997, 29.

min ing the winner. Other factors that also do not
make much of a difference include the foll owing:

• Vice-presidentia l nominee: There has rarely been
an election in which his or her id entity has made
a difference.
• Political reporting: It may make a difference in
some elections, but not in presidential ones.
• Religion: Being a Catholic was once a barrier, but
since John E Kennedy was elected pres ident in
1960, this is no longer true.
• Abortion: This probab ly affects who gets a party's
nomination, but in the genera l election ardent
supporters and ardent opponents are about evenly balanced.
In congressional races, however, in general it seems
that money does make a decisive difference. Scholars
are not entirely agreed on the facts. but there is strong
evidence that how much the challenger spends is most
importan t, because the ch allenger usua lly must
become known to the public. Buying name recognition
is expensive. Gary Jacobson has shown that, other
things being equal, in every congressional election
[rom 1972 to the ITlid-1980s, challengers who spent
more money did better than those who spent less. I 3
Jacobson also suggested that how much the incum. ents spent was not very important, presumably
beca use they already had all the na me recognition they
needed (as well as the other benefits of holding office,
such as free mail and travel). Other scholars, applyin g
different statistical methods to the same facts , have

come to different conclusions. It now seems that. other
things being equal, high-spending incumbents do
better than low-spending ones. 14 It also now seems
that ever higher spending by incumbents. both in
absolute dollars and relative to what challengers spend.
has become the congressional campaign norm. As
Table 10.3 shows. in 1978 average incumbent spending in congressional races was $284,577, average
challenger spend in g was $202,86 3, a nd the incumbent-to-challenger spending ratio was 1.40. By 1996
the average for incumbents had soared to $630,852,
the average for challengers had grown to $254,964,
and the incumbency spending advantage was 2.47.
Incul1)bents find it easier to raise money than do
ch allengers; incumbents provide services to their districts that challengers cannot; incumbents regu larly
send free ("franked") mail to their co nstituents. while
challengers must pay for their mailings; incumbents
can get free publicity by sponsoring legislation or
conducting an investigation. Thus it is hard ly surprising that incumbents who run for reelection win
in the overwhelming majority of races.

What Decides the Election?
To the voter it a ll seems qu ite simple-he or she votes
for "the best person" or maybe "the least-bad person." To scholars it is all a bit mysteriOUS. How do
voters decide who the best person is? What does
"best" mean , anyway ?

253

254

Chapter 10

Elections and Campaigns

Party
One answer to these questions is party identificati on.
People may say that they are votin g for the "best person," but for ma ny people the best person is always a
Democrat or a Republican . Moreover, we have seen in
Ch apter 7 that ma ny people know rather little about
the details of politica l issues. They may not even know
what position their favored ca ndidate has taken on
issues th at the voters care about. Given these fa cts,
many schola rs have argued that par ty identification
is the principal determinant of how people vote.) 5
If it were only a matter of party identification,
though, the Democrats would always win the presidency, since usually more people identify with the
Democratic than the Republican party. But we know

that the Democrats lost six of the nine presidential
elections between 19 68 and 2000. Here a re three
reasons for this.
First, th ose peo pl e who consid er themse lves
Democra ts a re less firmly wedded to their party than
are Republi ca ns. Table 10.4 shows how people identifying themselves as Democrats, Republica ns, or independents voted in presidential elections from 1960 to
2004. In every election except 1992, at least 80 percent of Republican voters supported the Republican
ca ndidate in each election. By contrast, there have
been more defections among Democratic voters- in
19 72 a third of Democrats supported Nixon, and in
19 84 some 2 6 percent supported Reagan.
The second reason, also clear from Table 10.4,
is that the Republicans do much better than the

.1960
1964
1968

1972
1976
1980'

1984
1988
1992

1996

2000
2004

Kennedy
Ni xon
Joh nson
Go ldwat er
Humphrey
Ni xon
Wal lace
M cGovern
Ni xon
Carter
Fo rd
Carter
Reagan
Ande rson
Mondale
Reagan
Dukakis
Bush
Clinton
Bush
Perot
Clinto n
Do le
Perot
Gore
Bush
Ke rry
Bu sh

.-

National

Republicans

Democrats

Independents

50 %
50
61
39
43
43
14
38
62
51
49
41
51
7
41
59
46
54
43
38
19
49
41
8
49
48
49
51

5%
95
20
80
9
86
5
5
95
11
89
11
84
4
7
92
8
91
10
73

84 %
16
87

43 %
57
56
44
31
44
25
31
69
48
52
30
54
12
35
63
43
55
38
32
30
43
35
17
45
47
49
48

13
74
12
14
67
33
80
20
66
26
6
73
26
82
17
77
10

17

13

13
80
6
8
91
6
93

84
10
5
86
11
89
11

' The figures for 1980, 1984, 1988, and 1996 fail to add up to 100 percent because of missing data.

Sources: Updated from Gallup poll data, compiled by Robert D. Cantor, Voting Behavior and Presidential Elections (Itasca, III. : F. E. Peacock, 1975),35; Gerald M. Pomper, The Election of 1976 (New York : David McKay,
1977), 61; Gerald M. Pomper et aI. , The Election of 1980 (Chatham, N.J.: Chatham House, 1981), 71; New
York Times/c BS Poll, November 5, 1992 .

What Decides the Election?
Democrats among the self-described Hindependent"
voters. In every election since 19 60 (except 1964.
1992. 1996. and 2004). the Republican candidate
has won a larger percentage of the independent vote
than the Democratic nominee; in fact the Republicans usually got a majority of the independents. who
tend to be younger whites.
Finally. a higher percentage of Republicans than
Democrats vote in elections. In every presidential
contest in the past thirty years. those describing
themselves as "strongly Repub lican" have been
much more likely to vote than those describing themselves as "strongly Democratic."

Issues, Especially the Economy
Even though voters may not know a lot about the
issues. that does not mean that issues play no role in
elections or that voters respond irrationally to them.
For example. V. O. Key. Jr.. looked at those voters who
switched from one party to another between elections and found that most of them switched in a
direction consistent with their own interests. As Key
put it. the voters are not fools. 16
Moreover. voters may know a lot more than we
suppose about issues that really matter to them. They
may have hazy. even erroneous. views about monetary policy. business regulation. and the trade deficit.
but they are likely to have a very good idea about
whether unemployment is up or down. prices at the
supermarket are stable or rising. or crime is a problem
in their neighborhoods. And on some issues- such as
abortion. school prayer. and race relations- they are
likely to have some strong principles that they want to
see politicians obey.
Contrary to what we learn in our civics classes. representative government does not require voters to be
well informed on the issues. If it were our duty as citizens to have accurate facts and sensible ideas about
how best to negotiate with foreign adversaries. stabilize the value of the dollar. revitalize failing industries.
and keep farmers prosperous. we might as well forget
about citizenship and head for the beach. It would be a
full-time job. and then some. to be a citizen. Politics
would take on far more importance in our lives than
most of us would want. given our need to earn a living
and our belief in the virtues of limited government.
To see why our system can function without wellinformed citizens. we must understand the differences between two ways in which issues can affect
elections.

• Prospective Voting Prospective means Hforward-looking"; we vote prospectively when we examine the views that the rival candidates have on the
issues of the day and then cast our ballots for the person we think has the best ideas for hand ling these
matters. Pr ospective voting requires a lot of information about issues and candidates. Some of us do
vote prospectively. Those who do tend to be political
junkies. They are either willing to spend a lot of time
learning about issues or are so concerned about
some big issue (abortion. school busing. nuclear
energy) that all they care about is how a candidate
stands on that question.
Prospective voting is more common among people
who are political activists. have a political ideology
that governs their voting decision. or are involved in
interest groups with a big stake in the election. They
are a minority of all voters. but (as we saw in Chapters 7 and 8) they are more influential than their
numbers wou ld suggest. Some prospective voters (by
no means all) are organized into Single-issue groups.
to be discussed in the next section.
• Retrospective Voting Retrospective means
"backward-looking"; retrospective vot ing involves
looking at how things have gone in the recent past
and then voting for the party that controls the White
House if we like what has happened and voting
against that party if we don't like what has happened.
Retrospective voting does not req uire us to have a lot
of information- aU we need to know is whether
things have. in our view. gotten better or worse.
Elections are decided by retrospective voters. 1 7 In
1980 they decided to vote against Jimmy Carter
because inflation was rampant. interest rates were
high. and we seemed to be getting the worst of things
overseas. The evidence suggests rather clearly that
they did not vote Jar Ronald Reagan; they voted for an
alternative to Jimmy Carter. (Some people did vote for
Reagan and his philosophy; they were voting
prospectively. but they were in the minority.) In 1984

prospective voting

Voting fo r a cand idate
because you favo r his or her ideas for handling
issues.
retrospectil1e voting Voting for a cand idate
because you li ke his or her pa st acti ons in
off ice.

255

256

Chapter 10

Elections and Campaigns

peopl e voted for Rona ld Reaga n beca use un employment. inflation. and interest rates were down a nd
beca use we no longer seemed to be getting pushed
around overseas. In 1980 retrospective voters wa n ted change; in 1984 they wa nted continuity. In 19 88
there was no incumbent running. but Geo rge H.W.
Bush portrayed himself as the ca ndidate who would
continue the policies that had led to prosperity and
depicted Michael Dukakis as a "closet liberal " who
would change those policies. In 199 2 the economy
had once again turned sour. a nd so voters turned
away from Bush a nd toward his rivals . Bill Clinton
and Ross Perot.
Though most incumbent members of Congress
get reelected. those who lose do so, it appears. largely because they are the victims of retrospective voting. After Reagan was first elected, the economy
went into a recession in 1981-1982. As a result
Republican members of Congress were penalized by
the voters. a nd Democratic challen gers were h elped .
But it is not just the economy that can hurt congressional candidates. In most midterm elections the
pa rty holdin g the White House ha s lost seats in Co ngress. Just why this should be is not entirely clear, but
it probably has something to do with th e tendency
of some voters to change their opinions of the presidential party once that party has had a chan ce to
govern- which is to say. a cha nce to ma ke some mistakes. disappoint some supporters. and irritate some
interests.
Some scholars believe that retrospective voting is
based largely on economic conditions. Figure 10. 3
certainly provides support for this view. Each dot represents a presidentia l election (fifteen of them, from
1948 to 2004). The horizontal axis is the percentage
increase or decrease in per capita disposable income
(adjusted for inflation) during the election year. The
vertical axis is the percentage of the two-party vote
won by th e party a lrea dy occupying the White
House. You can see that. as per capita income goes up
(as you move to the right on the horizontal axis). the
incumbent politica l party tends to win a bigger share
of the vote.
Other scholars feel that matters are more complica ted than this. As a result a small industry has
grown up cons istin g of peop le who use different
techniques to forecast the outcome of elections. If
yo u kn ow how the president stands in the opinion
polls several months before the election and how well
the eco nomy is performing. yo u ca n make a pretty

Figure 10.3

The Economy and Vote for President,
1948-2004

65

Nixon
1972

>-

'"a.

0_

60

~~a.

Clinton
1996

t

~ C

OJ

•

Eisenhower
1956

-OJ cOJ
_ -0
o .-

•

Joh nson
1964

•

t

•

55

o£>

~ E
-o u
:::>

Nixon
1960

Q) . ::

--a
%'

. Gore 2000
•
· Humphrey 1968
Ford 1976

•

50

c

OJ

~

OJ

0..

45

o

2

3

4

6

Percent ch ange in real disposable income
per ca pita in electi on year
Notes: (1) Each dot represents a presi dentia l election. show ing
th e popula r vote received by the incumbent presid ent's party.
(2) 1992 data do not include votes for indepen dent candidate
H. Ross Perot (3) 2004 va lue on RDI is projection f rom data
avai lable in Decem ber 2004.

Source: From American Public Opinion, 5th ed., by Robert S.
Erikson and Kent L. Tedin. Copyright © 199 5 by Addison·
Wesley Educational Publishers, Inc. Reprinted by perm ission of
Pearson Ed ucation. Inc.

good guess as to who is going to win the pres idency.
For congress ional races predicting th e result is a lot
tougher. beca use so many local factors affect these
contests. Election forecasting remains an inexact science. As one study of the performance of presidential
election forecasting models and the 1992 election
concluded. "Models may be no improvement over
pundits. "1 8

The Campaign
If party loya lty and nati onal economic conditions
pl ay so la rge a role in elections, is the campaign just
so und and fury, signifying nothing?
No. Ca mpa igns ca n make a differen ce in three
ways. First. they reawaken the partisan loyalties of
voters. Right after a party's nominating co nvention
selects a presidential candidate. that perso n's standing with voters of both parties goes way up in the
poll s. The reaso n is that the just-nominated candi-

What Decides the Election?
date has received a lot of medi a attention during the
summer months, when not mu ch else is happening.
When the campaign gets und er way, however. both
candidates get publicity, and voters return to their
normal Democratic or Republican affili ations.
Second , campaigns give voters a chance to watch
how the candidates handle pressure, and they give
ca ndidates a chance to apply th at pressure. The two
rivals, after promising to conduct a campaign "on the
iss ues" without mud slinging, immed iately star t
searching each other's personal histories and records
to find acts, statements, or congressional votes that
can be shown in the worst possible ligh t in newspaper or television ads. Ma ny voters don't like these
"negative ads"- bu t they work . Careful statistical
studies based on actual campaigns (as opposed to
voter surveys or laboratory-like focus group studies)
suggest that negative ads work by stimulating voter
turnout.1 9 As a result every politician constantly
worries about how an opponent mi ght portray his or
her record, a fact that helps expl ain why so many
politicians never do or say anything that can't be
explained in a thirty-second television spot.
Third , campaigns allow voters an opportunity to
judge the character and core values of the candid ates.
Most voters don't study in detail a candidate's positions on issues; even if they had the time, they know
that you ca n't predict how politicians will behave just
from knowing what a campaign manager has written
in a position paper. The voters want some guid ance as
to how a candid ate will behave once elected. They get
that guidance by listening not to the details of what a
cand id ate says but to the themes and tone of those
statements. Is the candid ate tough on crime and
drugs? Are his or her statements about the environment sincere or perfun ctory? Does the candidate favor
having a strong militar y? Does the ca ndidate care
more about not raising taxes or more about helping
the homeless?
The desire of voters to discer n character, combined with the mechanics of modern campaigningshort radio and television ads and computer-targeted
direct mail- lend themselves to an emph asis on
themes at the expense of details. This tendency is
reinforced by the expectations of ideological par ty
activists and single-issue groups.
Thematic ca mpa igning, negative ads, and the
demands of single-issue groups are not new; they are
as old as the republic. In the nineteenth century the
theme was slavery and the single-iss ue groups were

257

Ullion members were once heavily Democratic, but since Ronald
Reagan began willnillg white union votes ill 1980, these votes
have beell up for grabs.
abolitionists and their opponen ts; their negative ads
make the ones we have today sound like Sunday
school sermons. At the turn of the century the
themes were temperance and the vote for women;
both iss ues led to no-holds-ba rred, rough -andtu mble campai gning. In the 1970s and 1 9 80 s
new themes were adva nced by fundamentalist Christians and by pro- and antiabortion groups.
What has changed is not the tone of campaigning
but the advent of primary elections. Once, political
parties picked candidates out of a desire to win electi ons. Today activists and single-issue groups influence the selection of candidates, sometimes out of a
belief that it is better to lose with the "right" candidate th an to win with the wrong one. In a five-candidate primary, only 21 percent of the voters can pick
the winner. Single-issue groups can make a big difference under these conditions, even though they
may not have much influence in the general election.

Finding a Winning Coalition
Putting together a winning electoral coalition means
holding on to your base among committed partisans
and attracting the sw ing voters who cast their ballots
in response to iss ues (retrospectively or prospectively)
and personalities.
There are two ways to examine the nature of the
parties' voting coa litions. One is to ask what percen tage of various identifiable gro ups in the population

258

Cl1apter J 0

Elections and Campaigns

supported the Democratic or Republican cand idate
for president. The other is to ask what proportion of a
party's tota l vote came from each of these gro ups.
The answer to the fir st question tells us how loya l
African America ns, fanners, union members. and
others are to the Democratic or Republica n party or
ca ndidate; the answer to the seco nd question tells us
how importa nt each group is to a candidale or party.
For the Democratic coalition Afri can Americans
are th e most loyal voters. In every election but one
since 1952. two-thirds or more of all African Americans voted Democratic; since 19 64 four-fifths have
gone Democratic. Usu ally, Jewish voters are almost
as so lidly Democratic. Most Hispanics have been
Democrats, though the label "Hispanic" conceals differences among Cuban Americans (who often vote
Republican) a nd Mexican America ns and Puerto
Ricans (who are strongly Democratic). The turnout
among mosl Hispanic gro ups has been quite low

. t·

•

(many are not yet cilizens), so th eir political power is
not equivalent to th eir numbers.
The Democrats have lost their once strong hold
on Catholi cs, so uth erners, and union members. In
1960 Catholics supported John F. Kennedy (a Democrat a nd fellow Catholi c) , but they also voted [or
Eisenhower. Nixo n, and Reaga n, all Republicans.
Union members deserted the Democrats in 1968 and
1972, ca me back in 1980 and 1988, and divided
about evenly between the two parties in 1952 , 1956,
and 1980. White so utherners have voted Republican
in nation al elections but Democratic in many local
ones (see Table 10.5 ).
The Republican party is orten described as the
party of busin ess a nd profess iona l people. The loyalty of these groups to Republicans is in fact strong:
only in 1964 did they desert the Republican candidate to support Ly ndon Johnson . Farmers have usually bee n Repub lica n, but they are a vo latil e gro up,

.

Percentage of various groups saying that they voted for the Democratic presidential candidate, 7964-2004.

1968"

1972

1976

1980'

1984

1988

1992 d

1996

2000

2004

41%
45

37%
38

53 %
48

37%
45

37%
42

41 %
49

41%
46

43 %
54

42 %
54

45 %
52

Race
White
Non whit e

38
85

32
87

46
85

36
82

34
90

40
86

39
82

43
84

42
90

42
89

Edu cation
Co llege
Grad school

37
52

37
49

42
58

35
43

40
49

43
56

44
55

47
52

45
52

47
55

Age
Under 30
50 and over

47
41

48
36

53
52

43
41 '

41
39

47
49

44
50

53
48 9

48
48

54
49

Religion
Protestant
Catholic
Jewish b

35
59
85

30
48
66

46
57
68

NA

NA

40
45

44
66

33 f
47
64

33
44
78

36
53
78

42
50
79

41
48
76

Southerne rs

31

29

54

47

36

41

42

46

NA

41

Sex
Men
W omen

' 1968 election had three major candidates (Hu mphrey, Ni xon, and Wallace). bJewish vote estimated f rom various sources; since the number of Jewish persons interviewed is often less than 100, the error in this figure, as well as that for nonwhites, may be large. ' 1980 election had three major
candidates (Carter, Reagan, and Anderson) . d1992 election had three major candidates (Clinton, Bush, and Perot) ' For 1980-1992, refers to age
60 and over. fFor 1988, white Protesta nts only. 9For 1996, refers to age 45 and over.
Sources: For 1964-1976: Gallup poll data, as tabulated in Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, "Changing Patterns of Electoral Competition," in The New American Political System, ed. Anthony King (Washington, D.c.: American Enterprise Institute, 1978), 264-256. For 1980-1992 : Data from New York
Times/CBS News exit polls. For 1996: Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report, 1997, p. 188; For 2000: Exit polls supplied by ABC News. For 2004,
CNN exit polls.

The Effects of Elections on Policy
highly sensitive to the level of farm prices-a nd thus
quick to change parties. Contrary to popular wisdom, the Republica n party usua lly wins a majority of
the votes of poor people (defined as those earning less
than roughly $5,000 a yea r). Only in 1964 did most
poor people support the Democratic candidate. This
can be explained by the fact that the poor include
quite different elements- low-income blacks (who
are Democrats) and many elderly, retired persons
(who usua lly vote Republican).
In sum, the loyalty of most identifiable groups of
voters to either party is not overwhelming. Only
Afri can Americans, business people. and Jews usually give two-thirds or more of their votes to one party
or the other; other groups displ ay tendencies, but
none that ca nnot be overcome.
The contribution that each of these gro ups makes
to the party coa litions is a different matter. Though
Africa n Americans are overwh elmingly and persistently Democratic, they make up so small a portion of
the tota l electorate that they have never accounted for
more than a quarter of the tota l Democratic vote. The
groups that make up the largest part of the Democratic vote- Catholics, union members, so uthernersare also the least dependable parts of that coa lition.20
When representatives of various segments of society make demands on party leaders and presidential
candidates, they usually stress their numbers or their
loya lty, but rarely both. African American leaders, for
exampl e, sometimes describe the black vote as being
of decisive importance to Democrats and thu s deserving of special consideration from a Democratic president. But African Americans are so loyal that a
Democratic ca ndidate can almost take their votes for
granted, and in any event they are not as numerous
as other groups. Union lea ders emphasize how many
union voters there are, bu t a president will know that
union leaders ca nnot "deliver" the union vote and
that this vote may go to the president's opponent,
whatever the leaders say. For any presidential candidate a winning coalition must be put together anew
for each election. Only a few voters can be taken for
granted or wri tten off as a lost cause.

The Effects of Elections
on Policy
To the ca ndida tes, and perhaps to the voters . the on ly
interesting outcome of a n election is who won. To a

political scientist the interesting outcomes are the
broad trends in winning and losing and what they
imply about the attitud es of voters, the operation of
the electoral system, the fate of political parties, a nd
the direction of pub lic policy.
Figure 10.4 shows the trend in the popul ar vote for
president since before the Civil War. From 1876 to
18 96 the Democrats and Republicans were hotly
competitive. The Republicans won three times, the
Democrats twice in close contests. Beginning in 1896
the Republicans beca me the dominant party, and
except for 1912 and 1916, when Woodrow Wilson . a
Democrat. was able to win owing to a split in th e
Repub lican party. the Repub licans carried every presidential election until 1932. Then Franklin Roosevelt
put together what has since become known as the
" ew Deal coalition. " and the Democrats became the
dominant party. They won every election until 19 52.
when Eisenhower, a Repub lican and a popular military hero. was elected for the first of his two terms. In
the presidential elections since 1952 , power h as
switched hands between the parties frequently.
Still, cynics complain th at elections are meaningless: no matter who wins. crooks, incompetents, or
self-serv ing politicians sti ll hold office. The more charitable argue that elected officials are usually decent
enough , but that public policy remains more or less
the same no matter which official or party is in office.
There is no brief a nd simple response to this latter
view. Much depends on which olIke or policy you
examine. One reason it is so hard to generalize about
the policy effects of elections is that the offices to be
filled by the voters are so numerous and the abUi ty of
the politica l parties to unite these officeholders behind
a common policy is so weak that any policy proposal
must run a gauntlet of potential opponents. Though
we have but two major parties. and though only one
party can win the presidency, each party is a weak
coalition of diverse elements that reflect the many divisions in public opinion. The proponents of a new law
must put together a majority coalition almost from
scratch, and a winning coalition on one issue tends to
be somewhat different--quite often dramatically different- trom a winn ing coalition on another issue.
In a pa rli amentary system with strong pa rties,
such as that in Great Brita in, an election can often
h ave a major effect on public policy. When the
Labour pa rty won offi ce in 1945. it pu t several major
industries under public ownership and la unched a
comprehensive set of social services, including a

259

Chapter 10

260

Figure 10.4
-

Elections lind Campaigns

Partisan Division of the Presidential Vote in the Nation, 1856-2004

Republicans

-

• Party gai ning at least 5% of the vote

Democrats

70

60

50
Ql

§i
Ql

:5 40
Ql

OD

-E

30

Bull Moose

Ql
U

Qj
0...

Un ited We Stand
America (Perot)

. American

20

•

• Progressive

• Southern Democratic

American Independent •

• Constitutional Union

Reform (Perot)

10

Nati onal Unity (Anderson) .

. People's

1860

1868

1876

1884

1892

1900

1908

1940

1948

1956

1964

1972

1980

•

2004

Sources: Updated f rom Historical Data Archive, Inter-Un iversity Consortium for Political Research, as
reported in William H. Flanigan and Nancy H. Zingale, Political Behavior of the American Electorate, 3rd
ed ., 32.

nationalized health care plan. Its ambitious and controversial campaign platform was converted, almost
item by item, into law. When the Conser vative par ty
returned to power in 19 51 , it accepted some of these
changes but rejected others (for example, it denationalized the steel industry) .
American elections. unless accompanied by a
national crisis such as a war or a depression, rarely produce changes of the magnitude of those that occurred
in Britain in 1945. The constitutional system within
which our elections take place was designed to moderate the pace of change-to make it neither easy nor
impossible to adopt radical proposals. But the fact that
the system is intended to moderate the rate of change
does not mean that it will always work that way.
The election of 1860 brought to national power a
party cOlmnitted to opposing the extension of slavery
and southern secession; it took a bloody war to vindicate that policy. The election of 1896 led to the dominance of a party committed to high tariffs, a strong
currency, urban growth, and busin ess prosperity-a
commitment that was not significantly altered until

1932 . The election of that year led to the ew Deal,
which produced the greatest single enlargement of
federal authority since 1860. The election of 1964
gave the Democrats such a large majority in Congress
(as well as control of the presidency) that there began
to issue forth an extraordinary number of new policies
of sweeping significance- Medicare and Medicaid ,
federal aid to education and to local law enforcement,
two dozen environmen tal and consumer protection
laws, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, a revision of the
immigration laws, a nd a new cabinet-level Department of Housing and Urban Developmen t.
The electi on of 1980 brought into office an
administration determined to reverse the direction of
policy over the preced ing half century. Reagan's
administration succeeded in obtaining large tax cuts ,
signillcant reductions in spending (or in the rate of
increase of spending) on some domestic programs,
and changes in the policies of some reg ulatory agencies. The election of 1982, in which the Democrats
made ga ins in the Ho use of Representatives. stiffened
congreSS ional resistance to fur ther spending cuts

u.~. S~nate Challenger Launches
BllsterlOg Media Attack
TV and Radio Ad

"Callous" p

October 20

lllll~~~

r , LLf1l1

~~

s Call Incumbent
uppet of Big Money

PHOENIX, AZ

MEMORANDUM
To: Senator Joseph P Tierney
From: Gary Walker, campaign manager
Subject: Responding to negative ads
Never in your political career have
you been attacked so viciously. The
fact is that your lead is now in the
single digits, and we think it is
because of the negative ads. With
only a few weeks left until election
day, you need to decide whether you
want us to fight fire with fire.

Until last week
senator Joseph P Tevery statewide poll showed Us
I '
. lemey coast"
. .
ree ectlOn victory. Tod h
Illg to a comfortable
palg .
ay, owever th yn IS reeling. Polls sh
' e lemey camthanks to thirty-second ow the race tightening fast
ato '
negative ads d . .
,
r s votes against ce 1 .
eplctlllg the senscription drug p.'
I am gun contini bills and
"h
lice control pi
.
preeart/ess approach to bl' ans as eVIdence of his
"ard fi h
pu IC safety a d II
"'. or t e lives of the d'
n ca Ous disreTlemeys votes "PO/itica/~: ~~llY needy." The ads call
bIg drug companies who I Y s to the gun makers and
lave Owned him" lor
r
years .. .

Arguments for:
1. Negative ads work. In particular some studies, and lots of political lore, suggest that
"going negative" helps lesser-known, less-well-financed challengers against betterknown, better-financed incumbents who fail to respond in kind and in time.
2. In the age of the political sound bite, it is much easier to dish dirt on an opponent's
personal history and official record than it is to explain the complexities behind
one's own past votes or to put one 's past public statements back into context.
3. If you don't sling the mud back, it will stick to you, and people will question not
only your integrity but also your toughness .
Arguments against:
1. Negative ads can backfire . People don't like them, especially when the charges are
harshly personal or otherwise over the top .
2. A tit-for-tat sound bite volley can be positive: "I am a person of integrity. I vote my
conscience. I live to serve ."
3. If you stay positive and "wrap yourself in the flag," the mud will melt away and
people will question your opponent's decency and character.
Your decision:
Go negative _ _ __
Stay positive _ __

Chapter 10

262

Electiol1s al1d Campaigns

and stimulated renewed interest in tax increases as a
way of reducing the deficit. Following the election of
1984 a major tax reform plan was passed. After the
1996 election Clinton and Republican congressional
leaders agreed on a plan to balance the budget.
In view of all these developments it is hard to argue
that the pace of change in our government is always
slow or that elections never make a difference. Studies
by scholars confirm that elections are often Significant,
despite the difficulty of getting laws passed. One analysis of about fourteen hundred promises made between
1944 and 1964 in the platforms of the two major parties revealed that 72 percent were put into effect. 21
Another study examined the party platforms of
the Democrats and Republicans from 1844 to 1968
and all the laws passed by Congress between 1789
and 1968. By a complex statistical method. the
author of the study was able to show that during certain periods the differences between the platforms of
the two parties were especially large (1856, 1880,
1896, 1932) and that there was at about the same
time a high rate of change in the kinds of laws being
passed. 22 This study supports the general impression
conveyed by history that elections can often be central to important policy changes.
Why then do we so often think that elections make
little difference? It is because public opinion and the

*
T

political parties enter a phase of consolidation and
continuity between periods of rapid change. During
this phase the changes are. so to speak, digested, and
party leaders adjust to the new popular consensus,
which may (or may not) evolve around the merits of
these changes. During the 1870s and 1880s Democratic politicians had to come to terms with the failure of the southern secessionist movement and the
abolition of slavery; during the 1900s the Democrats
had to adjust again, this time to the fact that national economic policy was going to support industrialization and urbanization. not farming; during the
1940s and 1950s the Republicans had to learn to
accept the popularity of the New Deal.
Elections in ordinary times are not "critical"-they
do not produce any major party realignment. they are
not fought out over a dominant issue, and they provide the winners with no clear mandate. In most
cases an election is little more than a retrospective
judgment on the record of the incumbent president
and the existing congressional majority. If times are
good, incumbents win easily; if times are bad, incumbents may lose even though their opponents may
have no clear plans for change. But even a "normal"
election can produce dramatic results if the winner is
a person such as Ronald Reagan, who helped give his
party a distinctive political philosophy.

SUMMARY

oday's political candidates face the problem of
creating a temporary organization that can raise
money from large numbers of small donors. mobilize
enthusiastic supporters, and win a nomination in a
way that will not harm their ability to appeal to a
broader, more diverse constituency in the general
election. Campaigning has an uncertain effect on

election outcomes, but election outcomes can have
important effects on public policy, especially at those
times-during critical or "realigning" electionswhen new voters are coming into the electorate in
large numbers, old party loyalties are weakening. or
a major issue is splitting the majority party. Most
people vote retrospectively rather than prospectively.

Summary
RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?

1. How do Americall electiol1s determine tile kind of
people wl10 govern us?
American democracy rewards candidates who have
personal appeal rather than party endorsements.
Politics here produces individualists who usually
have a strong ideological orientation toward liberal or conservative causes, but only a weak sense of
loyalty to the political parties who endorse those
ideologies.

2. Wilat matters most in deciding who willS presidential lind congressional electiolls?
The party identUlcation of the voters matters the most.
Only 10 to 20 percent of the voters lli"e available to
have their votes changed. For them, the state of the
economy, and in wartime the success or failures we
have while fighting abroad, make the most difference.
Closely allied with those issues. at least for presidential
candidates, is the voters' assessment of their character.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. Do electiolls lIlalw a real dijference in what laws

get passed?
Yes. During campaigns parties may try to sound alike,
in order to attract centrist voters, but when in office
they differ greatly in the policies they put into law.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

Federa l Election Commission: www.fec.gov
Project Vote Smart: www.vote-smart.org
Election history: c1erkweb.house.gov

Electoral college: www.fec.gov/pages/ecmenu2
Ca mpaign finance: www.opensecrets.org

SUGGESTED READINGS
Asher. Herbert. Presidelltial Electiolls alld Alllerica/l Poli tics. 5th ed .
Pacific Grove. Ca li f.: Brooks/Co le. 1992 . A usefu l. brief ana lysis of how American s have voted.
Burnh am. Wa lter Dean. Critical E1ectiolls alld t" e MaillSpri llgs of
Alllerica ll Politics. New York: Norton. 19 70. An argument
about the decline in voting participation and the signi\1ca nce
of the rea lignin g election of 1896 .
Dionne. E. j .. and William Kristo!. cds. BLls" v. Gore. Washington.
D.C.: Brookings instituti on . 2001. Excellent collecti on of readings a nd cour t cases on the disputed Florida vote count in 2000.
jacobson. Gary C. T"e Politics of COllgressiollal E/ectiolls. 4th cd.
Boston: Little. Brown. 199 7. Careful analysis of how people get
elected to Congress.

Kayden . Xandra. Call1paigll Organizatioll. Lexington. Mass.: D. C.
Heath. 1978. A close look at how politi ca l campa igns are
organized. staffed. and led at the state level.
Page. Benjamin L C" oices ami Ec//Oes ill Presidelltial Electiolls.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1978. Ana lyzes the
interaction between the behavior of ca ndid ates a nd of voters
in American elections.
Su ndquist. ja mes L. DYllalllics of the Party Systelll: Aliglllllellt alld
/l ealiglllllellt of Political Parties il' tile Ul1ited States. Rev. cd.
Washin gton . D. C.: Brookin gs In stitution. 1983 . Historica l
ana lysis of rea ligning elections from 1860 to the nonrealignmcnt of 19 80.

263

CHAPTER

11

Interest Groups

Explaining Proliferation
The Birth of Interest Groups
Kinds of Organizations
Institutional Interests • Membership
Interests • Incentives to Join • The
Influence of the Staff

Interest Groups and Social
Movements
The Environmental Movement • The
Feminist Movement • The Union
Movement

Funds for Interest Groups
Foundation Grants • Federal Grants
and Contracts • Direct Mail

The Problem of Bias
The Activities of Interest Groups
Information • Public Support: The Rise
of the New Politics • Money and PACs
• The "Revolving Door" • Trouble

Regulating Interest Groups

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

2.

Do interest groups dominate government, and is any particular lobby
politically unbeatable?
Why do people join interest groups?

2.

Is the proliferation of political action
committees (PACs) and other groups
good or bad for America 's representative democracy?
Should interest groups' political
activities be restricted by law?

A

lmost every tourist arriving in Washington visits the White House and
the Capitol. Many look at the Supreme Court bu ilding. But hard ly any
wa lk down K Street, where much of the political life of the country occurs.
K Street? From the sidewalk it is just a row of office buildings, no different from what one might find in downtown Seattle or Kansas City. What's
to see? But in these buil dings, and in similar ones lining nearby streets, are
the offices of the nearly seven thousand organizations that are represented
in Washington.
It is doubtful whether there is any other nation in which so many organizations are represented in its capital. They are there to participate in politics. They are interest groups, or, if you prefer, lobbies.

*

Explaining Proliferation

There are at least three reasons why interest groups are so common in this
country. First, the more cleavages there are in a society, the greater the variety of interests that wi ll exist. In addition to divisions along lines of income
and occupation found in any society, America is a nation of countless immigrants and many races. There are at least seventy-two religions that claim
sixty-five thousand members or more. Americans are scattered over a vast
land made up of many regions with distinctive traditions and cultures.
These social facts make for a great variety of interests and opinions. As
James Madison said in &deralist No. 10, "The latent causes of faction are
thus sown in the nature of man. "
Second, the American constitutional system contributes to the number
of interest groups by multiplying the points at which such groups can gain
access to the government. In a nation such as Great Britain, where most
political authority is lodged in a single official such as the prime minister,
there are only a few places where important decisions are made-and thus
only a few opportunities for affecting those decisions. But when political
authority is shared by the pres ident, the courts, and Congress (and within
Congress among two houses and countless committees and subcommittees), there are plenty of places where one can argue one's case. And the
more chances there are to in fl uence policy, the more organizations there
will be that seek to exercise that influence.
This fact helps explain why in Great Britain there is often only one organization representing a given interest, whereas in the United States there are

265

266

Chapter 11

Interest Groups

several. In London on ly one major association represents farmers. one represents ind ustry. one represents veterans. an d one represents doctors. In the
United States. by contrast. at least three organizations represent farmers (the American Farm Bureau
Federation. the National Farmers ' Union. and the
Gra nge). and each of these is made up of state and
county branches. many of which act quite independently of nationa l hea dquarters. Though there is one
major American labor organization. the AFL-CIO. it
is in fact a loose coa lition of independent uni ons
(plumbers. steelwo rkers. coa l min ers). and some
large unions . such as the Teamsters. were for many
years not part of the AFL-CIO at all.
Third. the weakness of political parties in this
co untry may help explain the number and strengt h
of our interest groups. Where parties are strong.
interests work through the parties; where parties are
weak. interests operate directly on the government.
That at least is the th eory. Th ough scholars are not
certain of its validity, it is a pl a usible theory and ca n
be illustrated by differences among Ameri can cities.
In cities such as Chi cago where a party (in this case,
the Democrats) has historica lly been very strong.
labor union s. business associations. and citizens
gro ups have had to work with the party and on its
terms. But in cities such as Boston and Los Angeles
wh ere the parties are very weak. interest groups proliferate and playa large role in making poli cy.1

In Austria. France. and Italy many if not most
interest groups are closely linked to one or another
po litical party. In Italy. for example. each partySocia list. Communist. and Christian Democrat- has
a cluster of labor unions. professional associations.
and socia l clubs all ied with it. 2 Though American
interest groups often support on e party (the AFL-CIO.
for example. almost always ba cks Democratic ca ndidates for office). the relationship between party and
interest group here is not as close as it is in Europe.

The Birth of Interest Groups
The number of interest gro ups has grown rapid ly
since 1960. A study of Washington-based politica l
associations revealed that roughly 70 percent of
them es tablished their Washington offices after
1960. a nd nearly ha lf opened their doors after
19 70. 3
The 19 60s and 19 70s were boom yea rs for interest groups, but there h ave been other periods in our
h istory wh en politica l associations were created in
especially large numbers. Durin g the 1770s many
gro ups arose to agitate for America n independence;
during the 1830s and 1840s the number of religious
associations increased sharply. and the antislavery
movement began . In the 1860s trade unions based
on crafts emerged in significa nt numbers. farm ers

Tile greater tile activity oj government-jor example. ill
regLilatillg tile tilllber industry- the greater tile nlllnber oj
interest groups.

The Birth of Interest Groups
formed the Grange. and various fraternal organizations were born. In the 1880s and 1890s business
associations proliferated . The great era of organization building. however. was in the nrst two decades of
the twentieth century. Within this twenty-year period many of the best-known and largest associations
with an interest in national politics were formed: the
Chamber of Commerce, the Nationa l Association of
Manufacturers, the American Medical Association,
the National Associati on for the Advancement of
Colored People ( AACP) , the Urban League. the
American Farm Bureau Federation. the Farmers'
Union, the National Catholic Welfare Conference,
the Amer ica n Jewish Committee, and the AntiDefamation League. The wave of interest group formation that occurred in the 1960s led to the
emergence of environmental, consumer, and politica l reform organizations such as those sponsored by
consumer activist Ralph Nader.
The fact that associations in genera l, and political
interest groups in particular, are created more rapidly in some periods than in others suggests that these
gro ups do not arise inevitably out of natural socia l
processes. There have a lways been farmers in this
country. but there were no national farm organizations until the latter part of the nineteenth century.
Blacks had been victimized by various whitesupremacy policies Crom the end of the Civil War on.
but the AACP did not emerge until 1910. Men and
women worked in factori es for decades before industrial unions were formed.
At least four factors help explain the rise of interest groups. The first consists of broad economic
developments that create new interests and redefine
old ones. Farmers had li ttle reason to become organized for political activity so long as most of them consumed what they produced. The importance of
regular political activity became evident only after
most farmers began to produce cash crops for sale in
markets that were unstable or affected by forces (the
wea ther, the railroads, foreign competition) tha t
farmers could not control. Similar ly. for many
decades most workers were craftspeople working
alone or in sma ll groups. Such unions as existed were
little more than craft guilds interested in protecting
members' jobs and in training apprentices. The reason for large, mass-membership unions did not exist
until there arose mass-production industry operated
by large corporations.

Second, government policy itself helped create
interest groups. Wars create veterans, who in turn
demand pensions and other benefits. The first large
veterans organization. the Grand Army of the
Republic, was made up of Union veterans of the Civ il
War. By the 1920s these men were receiving about a
quarter of a billion dollars a year from the government. and naturally they created organizations to
watch over the distribution of this money. The federal government encouraged the formation of the
American Farm Bureau Federation (AFBF) by paying
for county agents who would serve the needs of
farmers under the supervis ion of local farm organizations; these county bureaus eventually came
together as the AFBE The Chamber of Commerce
was launched at a conference attended by President
William Howard Taft.
Professional societies, such as those made up of
lawyers and doctors. became important in part
because state governments gave to such groups the
authority to decide who was qualified to become a
lawyer or a doctor. Workers had a difficult time
organizing so long as the government, by the use of
injun ctions en forced by the police and the army,
prevented strikes. Unions, especially those in massproduction industries, began to flourish after Congress passed laws in the 1930s that prohibited the
use of injunctions in private labor disputes, that
required employers to bargain with unions. and that
allowed a union representing a majority of the
workers in a plant to require all workers to join it.4
Third, political organizations do not emerge automatically, even when government policy permits
them and social circumstances seem to require them.
Somebody must exercise leadership. often at substantial personal cost. These organizationa l entrepreneurs are found in greater numbers at certain
times than at others. They are often young, caught
up in a social movement, drawn to the need for
change. and in spired by some political or religious
doctrine. Antislavery organizations were created in
the 1830s and 1840s by enthusiastic young people
influenced by a religious revival then sweeping the
country. The period from 1890 to 1920. when so
many national organizations were created, was a
time when the college-educated middle class was
growing rapidly. (The number of men and women
who received college degrees each year tripled
between 1890 and 1920.) 5 During this era natural

267

268

Chapter I I

Table 11.1

Interest Groups

...

over half the public-interest lobbies opened their
doors after 1970.

Percentage Founded
Organization
Corporations
Unions
Professional
Trad e
Civil rights
Wom en/elderly/disabled
" Publ ic interest"
Socia l we lfare

After 1960

After 1970

14%
21
30
38
56
56
76
79

6%
14
14
23
46
46
57
51

Source: Kay Lehman Schlozman and John T. Tierney, Organized Interests
and American Democracy (New York : Harper & Row, 1986), 76. Copyright © 1986 by Kay Lehman Schlozman and John T. Tierney. Reprinted
by permission of Addison-Wesley Educational Publishers, Inc.

science and fundamentalist Christianity were locked
in a bitter contest, with the Gospels and Darwinism
offering competing ideas about persona l salvation
and social progress. The 19 60s, when many new
organizations were born. was a decade in which
young people were powerfully influenced by the civil
rights and antiwar movements and when college
enrollments more than doubled.
Finally, the more activities government undertakes, the more organized groups there will be that
are interested in those activities. As can be seen from
Table 1 1.1. most Washington offi ces represen ting
corporations, labor unions. and trade and professiona l associations were established before 1960- in
some cases many decades before- beca use it was
during the 1930s or even earlier that the government began making policies importan t to business
and labor. The great majority 0[' "public-interest"
lobbies (those concerned with the environment or
consumer protection), socia l welfare associations,
and organizations concerned with civil rights, the
elderly, and the handicapped established offices in
Washington after 1960. Policies of interest to these
groups. such as the major civ il rights and environmental laws, were adopted after that date. In fact

interest group

An organization of people
sharing a common interest or goal that seeks
to influence the making of public policy.

Kinds of Organizations
An interest group is any orga nization that seeks to
influence public policy. When we think 0 [' an organization, we usually think of so mething like the Boy
Scouts or the League of Women Voters- a group
cons istin g 0 [' individual members. In Washington,
however, many organizations do not have individual
members at all but are offices- corporatio ns, law
firms, public relations firms. or "letterhead" organ izations that get most of their money from fou nd ations or from the government-out of which a staff
operates. It is important to understand the differences between the two kinds 0[' interest groupsinstitutional and membership interests.6

Institutional Interests
Institutional interests are individuals or organizations representing other organizations. General
Motors. for exa mple, ha s a Washington representative. Over five hundred firms have such representatives in the capital. most of whom have opened their
offices since 1970. 7 Firms that do not want to place
their own full-time representative in Washington can
hire a Washington lawyer or public relations expert
on a part-time basis. Between 1970 and 1980 the
number of lawyers in Washington more than tripled;
Washington now has more lawyers (over 38.000)
than Los Angeles, a city three times its size. s Another kind of institutional interest is the trade or governmenta l association, such as the
ationa l
Independent Retail Jewelers or the ationa l Association of Co unties.
Individuals or organizations that represent other
organizations tend to be interested in bread-andbutter issues of vital concern to their clients. Some
of the people who specialize in this work can earn
very large fees. Top publi c relations experts and Washington lawyers can charge $400 an hour or more
for their time. Since they earn a lot, they are expected to deliver a lot.
Just what they are expected to deliver, however,
varies with the diversi ty of the groups making up the
organization. The American Cotton Manufacturers
Institute represents so uthern textile mill s. Those
mill s are few enough in number and similar enough

Kinds of Organizatiol1s
in outlook to allow the institute to carry out clear
policies squarely based on the business interests of its
clients. For example, the institute works hard to get
the federa l government to adopt laws and ru les that
will keep foreign-made textiles from competing too
easily with American-made goods. Sometimes the
institute is successfu l, sometimes not, but it is never
hard to explain what it is doing.
By contrast, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce represents thousands of different businesses in hundreds of
different commun ities. Its membership is so large and
diverse that the Chamber in Washington can speak
out clearly and forcefully on only those relatively few
matters in which all , or most, busin esses take the
same position. Since all businesses would like lower
taxes, the Chamber favors that. On the other hand,
since some businesses (those that import goods) want
low tariffs and other businesses (those that face competition from imported goods) want hi gher tariffs, the
Chamber says little or nothing about tariffs.
Institutional interests do not just represent business fLrms; they also represent governments. foundations. and universities. For example, the American
Council on Education claims to speak for most institutions of higher education, the American Pub li c
Transit Association represents loca l mass-transit systems. and the Nationa l Association of Counties
argues on beha lf of county governments.

Membership Interests
It is often sa id that Americans are a nation of joiners,
and so we take for granted the many organizations
around us supported by the activities and contributions of individua l citizens. But we shou ld not take
this mu ltiplicity of organizations for granted; in fact
their existence is something of a puzzle.
Americans join on ly certain kinds of organizations more frequently than do citizens of other democratic countries. We are no more likely than the
British, for example, to join socia l, business. professional, veterans, or charitable organizations, and we
are less likely to join labor unions. Our reputation as
a nation of joiners arises chiefly out of our unusually high tendency to join religiOUS and civic or politica l associations. About three times as many
Americans as Britons say that they are members of a
civic or poli tica l organization.9
This procliv ity of Americans to get together with
other citizens to engage in civic or political action
reflects, apparently, a greater sense of political effica-

269

cy and a stronger sense of civic duty in this country.
When Gabriel Almond and Sidney Verba asked citizens of five nations what they would do to protest an
unj ust local regulation . 56 percent of the Americans- but only 34 percent of the British and 13 percent of the Germans- said that they would try to
organize their neighbors to write letters, sign petitions, or otherwise act in concert. 10 Americans are
a lso more likely than Europeans to think that organized activity is an effective way to infl uence the
national government, remote as that institution may
seem. And this wilUngness to form civi c or political
groups is not a product of higher levels of education
in this country; Americans of every level of schooling are political joiners. lJ
But exp laining the American willingness to join
politica lly active groups by say ing that Americans
feel a "sense of po li tica l efficacy" is not much of an
explanation; we m ight as well say that people vote
because they think that their vote makes a difference.
But one vote clearly makes no difference at a ll in
a lmost any election; simi larly, one member, more or
less, in the Sierra Club, the Nationa l Rifle Association, or the NAACP clearly will make no difference in
the success of those organizations.
And in fact most people who are sympathetic to
the aims of a mass-membership interest group do
not join it. The AACP, for example, enrolls as members only a tiny fraction of a ll African Americans.
This is not because people are selfish or apathetic but
because they are rational and numerous. A single
African American, for examp le, knows that he or she

-

WE. B. Du Bois (center) was one oj the founders oj the NAACP
in 7910 and the editor oj its magazine, The Crisis.

270

Chapter 1 I

Interest Groups
empty a lake with a cup-unless they got something
out of joining.

Incentives toJoin

The largest interest group ill America is the AARP. tile AlIlerican
Association of Retired Persons.

can make no difference in the success of the NAACP,
just as a single nature enthusiast knows that h e or
she cannot enhance the power of the Sierra Club.
Moreover, if the NAACP or the Sierra Club succeeds,
African Americans and nature lovers will benefi t
even if they are not members. Therefore rational people who va lue their time and money would no more
join such organizations than they would attempt to

incentive

Something of value one cannot get
without joining an organization.
solidary incentives The social rewards (sense
of pleasure, status, or companionship) that
lead people to join political organizations.
material incentives Money or things valued
in monetary terms.

To get people to join mass-membership organizations, they must be offered an incentive-something of va lue they cannot get without joining.
There are three kinds of incentives.
Solidary incentives are the sense of pleasure,
status, or companionship that arises out of meeting
together in small groups. Such rewards are extremely important, but beca use they tend to be available
only from face-to-face contact, nationa l interest
groups offering them often have to organize themselves as coalitions of small loca l units. For example.
the League of Women Voters , the Parent Teacher
Association (PTA), the NAACP, the Rotary Club, and
the American Legion all consist of small local chapters that support a national staff. It is the task of th e
local chapters to lure members and obtain fund s
from them; the state or national staff can then pursue political objectives by using these fund s. Forming
organizations made up of small loca l chapters is
probably eas ier in the United States than in Europe
beca use of the great importance of local government
in our federa l system. There is plenty for a PTA, an
NAACP, or a League of Women Voters to do in its
own community, and so its members can be kept
busy with loca l affairs while the national staff pursues larger goa ls.
A second kind of incentive consists of material
incentives- that is, money, or things and services
readily valued in monetary terms. Farm organizations
have recruited many members by offering a wide range
of services. The Illinois Farm Bureau, for example,
offers to its members- and only to its members-a
chance to buy farm supplies at discount prices, to market their products through cooperatives, and to purchase low-cost insurance. These material incentives
help explain why the Illinois Farm Bureau has been
able to enroll nearly every farmer in the state as well as
many nonfarmers who also value these rewards.12
Similarly, the American Association of Retired
Persons (AARP) has recruited over 30 million members by supplying them with everything from lowcost life insurance and mail-order discount drugs to
tax advice and group travel plans. About 45 percent
of the nation's population that is fifty and older- one
out of every four registered voters- belongs to the
AARP. With an annual operating budget of over

Kinds of Organizations

Conlumer, UntOn
Washington Office
Professional Drivers CounCIl fOI
Salely and Health

Disability Atghts Group

\
The Nade r Netwo rk

Since the mid-l 960s consllmer activist Ralph Nader has
spawned more than a dozen in terest groups. In 2000
Nader ran Jar president as a Green party candidate.
$200 million a nd a cas h flow estimated at a whopping $10 billion , the AARP seeks to influ ence public
policy in many areas, from hea lth and housing to
taxes and transportation. To ga in additional benefi ts
for members, interest groups like the AA RP also seek
to influence how public laws are administered a nd
who gets govern ment grants. For exa mpl e, the Environmenta l Protection Agency funds the AARP to
hi re senior citizens as temporary workers for various
environmental projects. 1 3

The third-and most dimcult- kind of in centive
is the purpose of the organization. Many associations
rely chiefly on this purposive incentive- the
appea l of their stated goals-to recruit members. If
the attainment of those goa ls will also benefi t peopl e
who do not join, individua ls who do join will have to
be those who feel passionately about the goa l. who
have a strong sense of duty (or who ca nnot say no to
a fri end who asks them to join ), or for whom the cost
of joining is so small that they are indifferent to joinin g or not. Organizations that attract members by
appea ling to their interest in a coherent set of (usually) controversial principles are sometimes ca lled
ideological interest groups.
When the purpose of the organization, if atta ined,
will principally benefit nonmembers, it is customary
to call the group a public-interest lobby. (Whether
the public at la rge will rea lly benefit. of course. is a
matter of opin ion. but at least the group members
think that they are working selfl essly for th e common good.)
Though some public-interest lobb ies may pursue
relatively noncontroversial goals (for exa mple. persu ading people to vote or ra ising mon ey to hou se
orphans), the most visible of these organizations are
high ly controversial. It is precisely the controversy
that attracts the members, or at least those members
who support one side of the issue. Many of these
groups can be described as markedly liberal or decidedly co nservative in outlook.
Perhaps the best known of the libera l publicinterest groups are those found ed by or associated
with Ralph Nader. Na der became a popula r fi gure
in the mid-1960s after Genera l Motors made a
clumsy attempt to investigate and discredit his
background at a time when he was testifying in
favor of an a uto-sa fety bill . Na der won a large outof-court settlement aga inst General Motors, h is
books began to earn roya lties, a nd he was abl e to
command substantial lecture fees. Most of this
money was turned over to va rious organizations
h e created that dealt w ith matters of interest to
purposive incentive

A benefit that comes
from serving a cause or principle.
ideological interest groups Politicalorganizations that attract members by appealing to
their political convictions or principles .
publiC-interest lobby A political organization
whose goals will principally benefit nonmembers.

271

272

Chapter 11

Interest Groups

Public-Interest Law Firms
A special kind of public-interest lobby is an organization that advances its cause by bringing lawsuits to
challenge existing practices or proposed regu lations. A public-interest law firm will act in one of two ways:
First, it wil l find someone who has been harmed by some public or private policy and bring suit on his or
her behalf. Second , it will file a brief with a court supporting somebody else's lawsuit (this is called an amicus curiae brief; it is explained in Chapter 16).
Here are some examples of liberal and conservative public-interest law firms:

Liberal
American Civil Liberties Union
Asian American Legal Defense Fund
Lawyers' Committee for Civi l Rights
Mexican America n Legal Defense Fund
AACP Legal Defense and Education Fund
Natural Resources Defense Council
Women's Legal Defense Fu nd

cons umers. In addition he founded a gro up ca lled
Pub lic Citizen that raised money by direct-mail
so li citation from thousands of small contributo rs
and sought foundation grants. Finally. he helped
create Public Interest Research Gro ups (PIRGs) in
a number of states, supported by do nations from
co llege stud ents (voluntary at some co ll eges, a co mpulsory assessm ent levied on a ll stud ents at others)
and con cerned with organ izing stud ent activ ists to
work on loca l proj ects.
Recently cracks have begun to appear in the
ader movemen t. When Hawa ii and Ca lifornia consid ered pl ans to develop no-fault automobile insura nce, some former a llies of Nader led the effort to
reduce auto insurance prices by adopting a no-fault
syste m. ader deno unced this effort and urged
Hawaii's governor to veto the no-fault bill. Each side
criticized the other.
Conservatives, though slow to get started, have
a lso adopted the publ ic-interest organizational strategy. As with such associations run by libera ls, they
are of two kinds: those that engage in research a nd
lobbying and those that bring lawsuits designed to
advance their ca use. The boxes on pages 272 and
273 list some examples of public-interest orga nizations that support liberal or conservati ve ca uses .
Membership organization s that rely on purpos ive
incentives, especially appeals to deeply controversia l
purposes, tend to be shaped by the mood of the ti mes.
When an issue is hot- in the media or with the pub-

Conservative
Atlantic Legal Foundation
The Center for Individual Rights
Criminal Justice Legal Foundation
Landmark Legal Foundation
Mountain States Legal Fo undation
Pacific Lega l Foundation
Washington Legal Foundation

li c- such organizations can grow rapidly. When the
spotli ght fades, the organization may lose support.
Thus such organizations have a powerful motive to
stay in the public eye. To remain visible, publiC-interest lobbies devote a lot of attention to generatin g
publicity by developing good contacts with the medi a
and issuing dramatic press releases about crises a nd
scandals.
Because of their need to take advantage of a crisis
atmosphere, public-interest lobbies often do best when
the government is in the hands of an administration
that is hostile. not sympathetic. to their views. Environmentalist organizations could mobUize more resources
when James Watt. an oppo nent of much of the environmental movement. was secreta ry of the interior
than they could when Cecil D. Andrus. his proenvironment predecessor. was in offlce. By the same token
many conservative interest groups were able to raise
more money with the relatively liberal Jimmy Carter or
Bi ll Clinton in the White House than with the conserva tive Ronald Reagan or George W. Bush.

The Influence of the Staff
Wc often ma ke the mistake of assuming that what an
in terest group does politically is simply to exert influence on behalf of its members. That is indeed the
case when all the members have a clear a nd simil ar
stake in an issue. But many issues affect different
members differently. In fact. if the members joined to
obta in solidary or material bencfits. they may not

Interest Groups and Social Movements

Think Tanks in Washington
Think tanks are public-interest organizations that do research on policy questions and disseminate their
findings in books, articles, conferences, op-ed essays for newspapers, and (occasionally) testimony before
Congress. Some are nonpartisan and ideologically more or less neutral, but others-and many of the most
important ones-are aligned with libera l or conservative causes. Here are some examples of each:

Liberal

Conservative

Center on Budget and Policy Priorities
Center for Defense Information
Children's Defense Fund
Economic Policy Institute
Institute for Policy Studies
Joint Center for Political and
Economic Studies
Progressive Policy Institute

American Enterprise Institute
Cato Institute
Center for Strategic and
International Studies
Competitive Enterprise Institute
Ethics and Public Policy Center
Free Congress Foundation
Heritage Foundation

Note that the labels "liberal " and "conservative," while genera lly accurate, conceal important differences
among the think tanks in each list.

ca re at a ll about many of the issues with which the
organization gets involved. In such cases what th e
interest gro up does may reflect more what the staff
wants than what the members believe.
For example, a survey of the white members of a
large labor union showed that one-third of them
believed that the desegregation of schoo ls. housing.
and job opportunities had go ne too fa st; only onefifth thought that it had gone too slowly. But among
the staff members of the union, none thought that
desegregation had gone too fast, and over two-thirds
thought that it had gone too slowly. 14 As a result the
union staff aggressively lobbied Congress for the passage of tougher civil rights laws, even though most of
the union's members did not feel that they were
needed . The members stayed in the union for reasons
unrelated to civil rights, giving the staff the freedom
to pursue its own goals.

Interest Groups and Social
Movelnents
Because it is difficult to attract people with purposive
incentives, interest groups employing them tend to
arise out of social movements. A social movement
is a widely shared demand for change in some aspect

of the socia l or political order. The civil rights movement of the 1960s was such an event. as was the
environmentalist movement of the 1970s. A social
movement need not have liberal goals. In the nineteenth ce ntury, for examp le, there were va rious
nativist movements that sought to reduce immigration to this country or to keep Catholics or Masons
out of public office. Broad-based religious revivals
are social movements.
No one is quite certa in why socia l movements
arise. At one moment people are largely indifferent to
some issue: at a nother moment many of these same
people care paSSionately about religion, civil rights,
immigration. or conservation. A socia l movement
may be triggered by a sca ndal (an oil spill on the Santa
Barbara beaches helped launch the environmental
movement), the dramatic and widely publicized activities of a few leaders (lunch counter sit-ins helped
stimulate the civil rights movement), or the coming of
age of a new generation that takes up a cause advoca ted by eloquent writers, teachers. or evangelists.

social movement A widely shared demand for
change in some aspect of the social or political
order.

273

274

Chapter 11

Interest Groups

The Million Moms Mllrcll in 2004 demlll1ded II federal ban
on aSSllu/t weapons.

The Environmental Movement
Whatever its origin, the effect of a social movement is
to increase the value some people attach to purposive
incentives. As a consequence new interest groups are
formed that rely on these incentives. In the 1890s, as
a result of the emergence of conservation as a major
issue, the Sierra Club was organized. In the 1930s
conservation once again became popular, and the
Wilderness Society and the Natio nal Wildlife Federation took form. In the 1960s and 1970s environmental issues again came to the fore. and we saw the
emergence of the Environmental Defense Fund and
Environmental Action.
The smallest of these organizations (Environmen tal Action and the Environmental Defense Fund)
tend to have the most liberal members. This is often
the case with social movements. A movement will
spawn many orga nizations. The most passionately
aroused people will be the fewest in number, and they
will grav itate toward the organizations that take the
most extreme positions; as a result these organizations are small but vociferous. The more numerous
and less passionate people will gravitate toward more
moderate, less vocifero us organizations, which will
tend to be larger.

The Feminist Movement
There have been several feminist social movements
in this country's history- in the 1830s, in the
1890s, in the 1920s, and in the 19 60s. Each period
ha s brought into being new organizations. some of

which have endured to the present. For example, the
League of Women \Voters was found ed in 1920 to
educate and organi~e women for the purpose of
using effectively theirjnewly won right to vote.
Though a strong sense
of purpose may lead to the
I
creation of organizations, each will strive to find
some incentive that will sustain it over the long haul.
These permanentl incentives will affect how the
organization partiG:ipates in politics.
There are at least three kinds of feminist organizatio ns. First, there are those that rely chiefly on solidary incentives, enroll middle-class women with
relatively high levels of schooling, and tend to support those causes that command the widest support
among women generally. The League of Women Voters and the Federation of Business and Professional
Women are exampl es. Both supported the campaign
to ratify the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), but as
Jane Mansbridge has observed in her history of the
ERA, they were uneasy with the kind of intense,
partisan fighting displayed by so me other women's
organizations and with the tendency of more militant groups to link the ERA to other issues, such as
abortion. The reason for their uneasiness is clear:
to the extent they relied on solidary incentives. they
had a stake in avoiding issues and tactics that would
divid e their membership or reduce the extent to
which membership provided camaraderie and professional contacts. IS
Second, there are women's organizations that
attract members with purposive incentives . The
National Organization for Women (NOW) and the
National Abortion Rights Action League (NARAL)
are two of the largest such groups. though there are
many smaller ones. Because they rely on purposes,
these organizations must take strong positions, tackle
divisive issues. and employ militant tactics. Anything
less would turn ofT the committed feminists who
make up the rank and fil e and contribute the funds.
But because these groups take co ntroversial stands,
they are constantly embro'!ed in internal quarrels
between those who think t (t they have gone too far
and those who think that they have not gone far
enough, between women w 0 want NOW or NARAL
to join with lesbian and s cialist organizations and
those who want them to teer clear. Moreover, as
Mansbridge showed, Purp~sive organizations often
ca nnot make their decisio s stick on the local level
(local chapters will do prett much as they please). 16

Interest Groups and Social Movements

Figure 11.1

The Decline in Union Membership

u

25

"

20

Q)

24

.E

Vi
c:
.2 21

£)

~

ro

E

E

18

c:

'0

</J

W 15
£)

Q)

Ol)

2c:

E
Q)
E 12
c:
.2

'0
W
£)

u

W

0.
</J

'"~

9

10

Q)

£)

E
Q)
E

6

::l

Z

15

Q)

c:

::l

E

275

c:

3

2

c:

::::>

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

201 0

Sources: Historical Statistics of the United States, vol. 1, 178; Statistical Abstract of the United States,
1998,444; U.S. Census Bureau; Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2003, 432 , 433.

The third kind of women's organ ization is the
ca ucus that takes on specific issues that have some
material benefit to women. The Women's Equity
Action League (WEAL) is one such gro up. Rather
than relyin g on membership dues for financial support. it obta ins grants from foundations and government agencies. Freed of the necess ity of satisfying a
large rank-and-file membership, WEAL has concentrated its effor ts on brin ging lawsuits aimed at
enforcing or en larging the lega l rights of women in
higher education an d other in stitutions. In electora l
politics the National Women 's Political Ca ucus (o fficia lly nonpartisan, but generally liberal a nd Democratic) and the National Federation of Republican
Women (o penly supportive of the Republican party)
work to get more women active in politics and more
women elected or appointed to offi ce.
The feminist movement has . of course. spawned
an a ntifeminist movement, and thus feminist organizations h ave their a ntifeminist counterparts. The
ca mpai gn by NOW for the ERA was attacked by a
women 's gro up ca lled STOP ERA; the proabortion
position of ARAL has been challenged by the various organizations associated with the right-to-life
movement. These opposition groups have their own
tactical pro bl ems, which arise in large part from their
relia nce on different kind s of incentives. In the cha p-

ter on civil rights we sha ll see how th e co nflict
between these opposing groups shaped the debate
over the ERA.

The Union Movement
When social movements run out of steam, they leave
behind organizations that continue the fight. But
with the movement dead or dorma nt, the organiza tions often mu st stru ggle to stay alive. Thi s has happened to labor uni ons.
The major union movement in this co untry
occurred in the 1930s, when the Great Depression,
popul ar support. a nd a sympathetic administration
in Washington led to a rapid growth in union membership. In 1945 union members hip peaked ; at that
time nea rly 36 perce nt of all nonfarm workers were
union members.
Since then union membership has fallen more or
less steadily. so th at by 2002 only 11 percent of all
workers were unionized (see Figure 11.1 ). This
decline has been cau sed by several factors. There has
been a shift in the nation's economic life away from
industrial production (where unions have traditionally been concentrated) a nd toward service delivery
(where unions have usually been weak). But accompanying this declin e. and perhaps contributing to it,
has been a decline in popular approval of unions.

276

Chapter 11

Interest Groups

Table 11.2

Employee Unions
Number of Members

Union
National Association of Letter Carriers
Postal Workers
American Federat ion of Teachers
Am eri ca n Federation of State and Co unty
Mu nicipal Employees

1979

1983

1993

2002

151,000
245,000
423,000
889,000

201,000
213,999
544,000
1 mill io n

210,000
249,000
574,000
1.16 mil lion

302,000
332,000
1.3 m ill ion
1.4 millio n

Four-Uni on Total 1979: 1.71 millio n
Fo ur-Uni on Total 2002: 3.33 millio n
Percent Ch ange, 1979- 2002: +94 %
Sources.' Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1994, table 696, 443; post-1998 press releases and fact sheets by each organization.

Approval has moved down side by side with a decline
in membership and declines in union victories in
elections held to see whether workers in a plant want
to join a union. The social movement that supported
unionism has faded.
But unions will persist, because most can rely on
incentives other than purposive ones to keep them
going. In many industries they can require workers
to join if they wish to keep their jobs, and in other
industries workers believe that they get sufficient
benefits from the union to make even voluntary
membership worthwhile. And in a few industries,
such as teaching and government, there has been a
growth in membership, as some white-collar workers
have turned to unions to advance their interests.
Unions composed of government workers are
becoming the most important part of the union
movement. They are almost the only part that is
growing in size. For example, from 1983 to 1999 the
number of private sector union members fell from
11.9 million to 9.4 million, a 21 percent drop. Over
the same period, however, the number of public sector union members rose [rom 5.7 mil lion to 7 mill ion,
a 22 percent increase. 17 Especially significant has
been the membership growth in certain government
employee unions (see Table 11.2). These unions have
gained new members and political clout at a time
when almost every industrial union was losing both.

*

Funds for Interest Groups

All interest groups have some trouble raising money,
but membership organizations have more trouble

than most, especially membersh ip organizations
relying on appeals to purpose-to accomplishing
stated goals. As a result the Washington office of a
public-interest lobbying group is likely to be small,
stark, and crowded, whereas that of an institutional
lobby, such as the AFL-CIO or the American Council
on Education, will be rather lavish.
To raise more money than members supp ly in
dues, lobbying organizations have turned to three
sources that have become important in recent years:
foundation grants, government grants, and directmail solicitation.

Foundation Grants
One study of eighty-three (primarily liberal) publicinterest lobbying groups found that one-third of
th em received half or more of all their funds from
foundation grants; one-tenth received over 90 percent from such sources. IS In one ten-year period the
Ford Foundation alone contributed about $21 million to liberal pub lic-interest groups. Many of these
organizations were law firms that, other than the
staff lawyers, really had no members at all. The Environmental Defense Fund is supported almost entirely
by grants from foundations such as the Rockefell er
Family Fund. The more conservative Scaife founda tions gave $1.8 million to a conservative publicinterest group, the National Legal Center for the
Pub lic Interest.1 9

Federal Grants and Contracts
The expansion of federa l grants during the 1960s
and 1970s benefited interest groups as well as cities
and states; the cutbacks in those grants during the

FWllls for Interest Groups
early 1 980s hurt interest groups even more than
they hurt local governmen ts . or co urse the federa l
government u sually does not give the money to support lobbying itself; it is given instead to support
some project that the orga nization has under ta ken .
For exa mple, many large nationa l for-prollt firms
w it h trade representatives or other lobby ists in
Was hin gton (sometimes u nfl atteringly referred to as
"beltway bandits") do most or all of their business by
w innin g federal grants and contracts. Even large
nationa l religious nonprollt organizations such as
Luthera n Socia l Ser vices. Catholic Charities , the Salva ti on Ar my, a nd th e Jew is h Feder atio ns have
received millions of dollars in governmen t grants to
provide diverse social serv ices a nd run various community projects. But money for a service or project
helps sup port the orga nization as a whole and thus
enables the organization to press Congress for policies it favors (incl uding. of co urse, policies that will
supply it with more gra n ts and contracts).
Nobody really knows whether the groups that win
federal grants and contracts are doing a good job or
not. The nonprofit a nd other organ izations that
receive the lion's share of federa l gra nts and con tracts
are rarely, if ever, subjected to government performance a udits or independent research eva luations. 20 A
White Hou se report on grant-making across five federa l agencies found that each agency 's to p ten discretionar y gra nt recipien ts cha nged little over the
course of a decade.21 Due in part to the interestgroup poli tics of federa l gra n ts and contracts. the
"organizations th at administer social serv ices funded
by Washingto n are ty pically large a nd entrenched, in
a n almost monopolistic fashion."22
In the 1980s the Reaga n administration attempted to cut back on federal fund s going to nonprofit
gro ups that conservatives claimed a lso lobbied fo r
liberal causes. Some writers ca ll ed thi s a n effort to
"de-fund the left." In 2001 the Bush administration
attempted to increase federa l fund s goin g to faithbased organizations. Some writers co nstrued this an
effort to "fund the relig ious righL " either effort,
however. made a significa nt difference either in
which organization s won or lost federa l grants a nd
contracts, or in how much federa l money was ava ilabl e overall.

Direct Mail
If t here is anyone technique th at is unique to the
modern interest group, it is the sophistication w ith
whi ch ma ilings a re used both to raise money a nd to

Many large religious nonprofi t orgallizations, like the
Salvation Army, receive some governmentjunding.

mobilize supporters. By using co mpu ters. membersh ip interest groups can ma il directly to specialized
a udiences iden tified fro m lists developed by the staff
or purchased from other organiza tions. Letters can
be ta il or-made. for example, to a ppea l to upperincome residen ts of Oregon who belong to the Sierra
Club. li ve nea r the Columbia River, ow n fou r-wheeldri ve vehicles. and thus m ight be interested in ma inta ini ng a local wilderness area.
A class ic example of a n interest grou p that was
created and maintained by direct-mail solicitation is
Common Cause. a liberal organization fou nded in
1970. Its creator. John Gardner. sen t letters to tens of
thousands of people selected fro m mailing lists it h ad
acquired, urgin g them to join the organization and to
send in money. Over two hundred thousand members were obtained in this way, each of whom mailed
in dues (initia lly $ 1 5 a yea r) in ret urn for nothing
more tha n the sa ti sfaction of belongin g.
Bu t ra ising money by ma il costs money- lots of
money. To br ing in more money tha n it spends, the
interest gro up must write a letter that will galvanize
eno ugh readers to send in a check. "Enough " usually am ou nts to at least 2 percen t of the na mes on the
li st. Techniques include the foll ow ing:
• P ut a "teaser " on the outside of the envelope so th at
it won 't be thrown out as "junk ma il. " If the letter
is going to African Americans. put a pi cture of
Reverend Ma rtin Luther King. Jr. on the envelo pe.
• Arouse emotions. preferably by portray ing the
th reat posed by some "devil. " To enviro nmenta lists, a ty pical devil would be former secretary of

277

278

Chapter 11

Interest Groups

the interior James Watt; to civil libertarians, former Moral Majority leader Jerry Falwell; to conservatives, Senator Ted Kennedy.
• Have the endorsement of a famous name. For liberals it is often Senator Kennedy ; for conservatives
it may be House leader Tom DeLay.
• Personalize the letter by instructing the computer
to insert the recipient's name into the text of the
letter to create the impression that it was written
personally to him or her.

'* The Problem of Bias
Many observers believe that the interest groups active
in Washington reflect an upper-class bias. There are
two reasons for this belief: fLrst, well-off people are more
likely than poor people to join and be active in interest
groups. and second, interest groups representing business and the professions are much more numerous
and better financed than organizations representing
minorities, consumers, or the disadvantaged.
Doubtless both these facts are true. Many scholars
have shown that people with higher incomes. those
whose schooling went through college or beyond . and
those in professional or technical jobs were much
more likely to belong to a voluntary association than
people with the opposite characteristics. Just as we
would expect, higher-income people can afford more
organizational memberships than lower-income
ones; people in business and the professions find it
both easier to attend meetings (they have more control over their own work schedules) and more necessary to do so than people in blue-collar jobs; and
people with college degrees often have a wider range
of interests than those without. One study found that
over half of the many thousand groups represented
in Washington were corporations. and another third
were professional and trade associations. Only 4 percent were public-interest groups; fewer than 2 percent were civil rights or minority groups.23 About
170 organizations represented in Washington were
concerned just with the oil industry.
But the question of an upper-class bias cannot be
settled by these two facts taken alone. In the first place.
they describe only certain inputs into the political system: they say nothing about the outputs- that is. who
wins and who loses on particular issues. Even if 170
interest groups are trying to protect the oil industry.

this is important only if the oil industry in fact gets
protected. Sometimes it does; sometimes it does not. At
one time. when oil prices were low. oil companies were
able to get Congress to pass a law that sharply restricted the importation of foreign oil. A few years later.
after oil prices had risen and people were worried
about energy issues, these restrictions were ended.
In the second place. business-oriented interest
groups are often divided among themselves. Take one
kind of business: farming. Once. farm organizations
seemed so powerful in Washington that scholars
spoke of an irresistible "farm bloc" in Congress that
could get its way on almost anything. Today dozens
of agricultural organizations operate in the capital,
with some (such as the Farm Bureau) attempting to
speak for all farmers and others (such as the Tobacco
Institute and Mid-America Dairymen) representing
particular commodities and regions.
Farmers still have a great deal of influence. especially when it comes to blocking a bill that they
oppose. But it is proving difficult for them to get Congress to approve a bill that they want passed. In part
this political weakness reflects the decline in the number of farmers and thus in the number of legislators
who must take their interests into account. In part
their political weakness reflects splits among the
farmers themselves. with southern cotton growers
often seeing things differently from midwestern
wheat growers or New England dairy farmers. And to
some extent it reflects the context within which interest group politics must operate. In the 19 50s few people thought that providing subsidies for farmers was
too expensive- if indeed they knew of such programs
at all. But by the 1980s consumers were acutely
aware of food prices. and their legislators were keenly
aware of the cost of farm-support programs. 24
Whenever American politics is described as having an upper-class bias. it is important to ask exactly
what this bias is. Most of the major conflicts in American politics- over foreign policy. economic affairs.
environmental protection. or equal rights for
women- are conflicts within the upper middle class;
they are conflicts. that is. among politically active
elites. As we saw in Chapter 7. there are profound
cleavages of opinion among these elites. Interest
group activity reflects these cleavages.
Nonetheless. it would be a mistake to ignore the
overrepresentation of business in Washington. A student of politics should always take differences in the

The Activities of Interest Groups

OKLAHOMA

FARMERS
UNION

Farmers once had great influence in Congress and could get their way with a Jew telephone calls.
Today they often must use mass protest methods.

availability of political resources as an important clue
to possible differences in the outcomes of political conflicts . But they are only clues, not conclusions.

The Activities of Interest
Groups
Size a nd wealth are no longer entirely accurate
measures of an interest group's influence-if indeed
they ever were. Depending on the issue, the key to
political influence may be the ability to generate a
dramatic newspaper headline, mobilize a big letterwriting campaign, stage a protest demonstration, file
a suit in federal court to block (or compel) some government action, or quietly supply information to key
legislators. All of these things require organization,
but only some of them require big or expensive
organizations.

Information
Of a ll these tactics, the single most important one-in

th e eyes of virtually every lobbyist and every academic student of lobbying-is supplying credible information. The reason why information is so valuable is

that. to busy legislators and bureaucrats, information
is in short supply. Legislators in particular must take
positions on a staggering number of issues about
which they cannot possibly become experts.
Though there are nonpolitical sources of information, such as encyclopedias, they often do not provid e
the kind of detailed , specific, up-to-date information
that politicians need. This kind of information will
ordinarily be gathered only by a group that has a
strong interest in some issue. Lobbyists. for the most
part. are not flamboyant, party-giving arm-twisters;
they are specialists who gather information (favorable
to their clients, naturally) and present it in as organ ized, persuasive, and factual a manner as possible. All
lobbyists no doubt exaggerate, but few can afford to
misrepresent the facts or mislead a legislator. and for
a very simple reason: almost every lobbyist must
develop and maintain the confidence of a legislator
over the long term, with an eye on tomorrow's issues
as well as today's. Misrepresentation or bad advice
can embarrass a legislator who accepts it or repel one
who detects it, leading to distrust of the lobbyist.
Maintaining contacts and channels of communication is vital; to that end, maintaining trust is essentia l.
The value of the information provided by a lobbyist is often greatest when the issue is fairly narrow,

279

280

Chapter 11

Interest Groups

invo lving only a few interest grou ps or a co mplex
eco nomic or technica l problem. The va lue of information , and thu s the power of the lobbyist, is likely to
be least when the issue is one of broad a nd highly visib le nationa l policy.
Sometimes the nature of an issue or the governmental process by which an issue is resolved gives a
great adva ntage to the suppliers of certain information and imposes a great burd en on would-be suppliers of contrary information. This is an example of
what is called "client politics." Fo r example, the Civil
Aeron a utics Board (CAB) once set airlin e fa res a nd
decided what airlines would fly to what cities. Historically the only organizations with any incentive to
appear before the CAB a nd supply the necessa ry
infor mati on were, natura lly, the airlines. Until the
CAB began to deregulate civil aviation, CAB decisions often tended to favor the established airlines.
For a long time only radio a nd television broadcasters had a ny in centive (o r could affo rd ) to appear
before the Federa l Co mmuni cations Co mmi ss ion
(FCC), whi ch decides which broadcasters sha ll be
li censed a nd on what terms. Owing to cha nges in the
industry (s uch as the rise of cabl e a nd satellite telev ision) and to the growth of consum er groups, FCC
hearings a re now often hotly co ntested. When the
Federal Energy Admi n istrati on (FEA) was trying to
a ll ocate scarce oil an d gasoline supplies a mong competin g users, it discovered that the information it
needed was possessed only by the oil compa nies. (It
later too k steps to develop its own sources of data.)
Public officials not only want techni ca l information; they a lso wa nt political cues. A poli tica l cu e is
a signal telling the official what va lues are at stake in
a n iss ue- who is for. who aga inst a pro posal-a nd
how that issue fi ts into his or her own set of politica l
beliefs. Some legislators feel co mfortabl e when they
are on the liberal side of a n issue. an d others feel
co mfortable when they are on the conservative sid e,
espec ially when they are not familiar wi th the deta il s
of the issue. A libera l leg islator will look to see

whether the AFL-CIO. the NAACP, the Americans for
Democratic Action, the Fa rmers' Uni on, a nd various
co nsumer orga nizations favor a proposal; if so, tha t is
often all he or she h as to know. If these liberal groups
a re split, then the legislator will wor ry about the
matter and try to look into it more cl osely. Similarly,
a co nser vative legislator will feel comfortable tak ing
a stand on an issue if the Chamber of Commerce, the
Nation al Rifle Association, th e American Medical
Associa ti o n. variou s business associati o ns. and
Americans for Constitutional Action are in agreement about it; he or she will fee l less comfortabl e if
su ch co nser vative groups are di vided. As a resu lt of
this process lobbyists often work together in informa l
coa litions based on general political ideo logy.
One important way in wh ich these cues a re made
kn own is by r atin gs th at interest groups ma ke of legislators. These are regularly compiled by the AFL-CIO
(on who is prolabor), by the American s for Democratic Action (on who is libera l), by the Americans for
Constitutiona l Action (on who is conservative) . by the
Consumer Federation of America (on who is proconsum er), and by the League of Conservation Voters (o n
who is pro-environment). These ratings are designed
to generate public support for (or opposition to) various legislators. Th ey ca n be helpful sources of informati on , but they a re so metimes biased by the
a rbitrary determin ation of what constitutes a liberal.
proco nsumer. or conservative vote.
Both poli tica l inform ation a nd political cues now
ar rive in the offices of politicia ns at a faster rate tha n
ever before. tha nks to fax machines and the Internet.
Many interest groups and political activists h ave
ba nks of co mputer-operated fax machines th at ca n
get a short. snappy documen t into the h ands of every
legislator within minutes. Wil lia m Kristo!, a Repub lican activist, used this technique to good effect in
1993 when he bombarded Republican members of
Co ng ress w ith a rguments co ncerning why th ey
should oppose President Clinton 's health care pla n.
Ma ny believe he pl ayed a major role in the defeat of
that pla n.

political c u e

A signal t ell ing a leg is lator wh at
values are at sta ke in a vote, an d how th at
issu e fits into his or her own pol itica l views o n
party agenda.
ratings Assessm ents of a re presentat ive 's voting reco rd on issues importa nt to an interest
group.

Public Support: The Rise of the
New Politics
On ce upon a time, when the government was small ,
Co ngress was less individualistic, a nd telev ision was
nonexistent, lobbyists ma inly used an insider strategy : they worked closely with a few key members of

The Activities of Interest Groups
Congress, meeting them privately to exchange information and (sometimes) favors. Matters of mutual
interest could be discussed at a leisurely pace, over
dinner or while playing go lf. Public opini on was
important on some highly visible issues, but there
were not many of these.
FollOWing an insider strategy is still valuable, but
increaSingly interest groups have turned to an outsider strategy. The newly individualistic nature of
Congress has made this tactic useful , and modern
techno logy has made it possible. Radio, fax
machines, and the Internet can now get news out
almost immediately. Satellite television can be used
to link interested citizens in various locations across
the country. Toll-free phone numbers can be publicized, enabling voters to call the offices of their members of Congress without charge. Public opinion
polls can be done by telephone, virtually overnight,
to measure (and help generate) support for or opposition to proposed legislation. Ma il can be directed by
computers to people already known to have an interest in a particular matter.
This kind of grassroots Lobbying is central to the
outsider strategy. It is designed to generate public
pressure directly on government officials. The "public" that exerts this pressure is not every voter or even
most voters; it is that part of the public (sometim es
called an issue public) that is directly affected by or
deeply concerned with a government policy. What
modern technology has made possible is the
overnight mobilization of specific issue publics.
Not every issue lends itself to an outsider strategy:
it is hard to get many people excited about, for example, complex tax legislation affecting only a few
firms. But as the government does more and more, its
policies affect more and more people, and so more
and more will join in grassroots lobbying efforts over
matters such as abortion, Medicare, Social Security,
environmental protection, and affirmative action.
Undoubted ly the new politics creates new conflicts. Since conflict is the essence of politiCS, it may
seem strange that politicians dislike controversy. But
they do, and for perfectly human reasons: no one
enjoys dealing with people who are upset or who find
one's viewpoint objectionable or unworthy. Consequently, most legislators tend to hear what they want
to hear and to deal with interest groups that agree
with them. 25 Two senators from the same state may
choose to listen to very different constituencies in
that state and to take very different policy positions.

Neither senator may feel "pressured" or "lobbied ,"
because each has heard mostly from groups or persons who share his or her views. (Politicians define
"pressure" as arguments and inducements supplied
by somebody with whom they disagree.)
Members of an interest group will also tend to
work primarily with legislators with whom they
agree; lobbyists do not lil(e to argue with people who
are suspicious of them or who are unlil<:ely to change
their minds no matter what is said . For the lobbyist
the key target is the undecided or wavering legislator
or bureaucrat. Sometimes lobbyists will make a major
effort to persuade an undecided legislator that public
opinion is strongly inclined in one direction . A lobbyist will do this by commissioning public opinion polls,
stimulating local citizens to write letters or send
telegrams, arranging for constituents to pay personal
visits to the legislator, or getting newspapers to run
ed itorials supporting the lobbyist's position.
Though most lobbying organizations cultivate the
goodwill of government officials, there are important
exceptions. Some groups, especially those that use an
ideological appeal to attract supporters or that depend
for their maintenance and influence on media publicity, will deliberately attack actual or potential allies in
government in order to embarrass them. Ralph ader
is as likely to denounce as to praise those officials who
tend to agree with him, if their agreement is not sufficiently close or public. He did this with Senator
Edmund Muskie, the author of the Clean Air Act, and
with William Haddon, Jr., an early administrator of
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
The head of the Fund for Animals is not reluctant to
attack those officials in the Forest Service and the
Interior Department on whose cooperation the fund
must rely if it is to achieve its goals. 26 Sometimes, as
we shall see later in this chapter, the use of threats
instead of rewards extends to physical confrontations.
It is not clear how often public pressure works.
Members of Congress are skilled at recognizing and
discounting organized mail campaigns and feel that
they can occasionally afford to go against even legitimate expressions of hostile public opinion. Only a
few issues of great symbolic significance and high
visibility are so important that a member of Congress
would think that to ignore public opinion would
mean lOSing the next election. In 1978 the proposed
Panama Canal treaties were one such case; since the
1980s abortion has been another. Issues such as
these can make or break a member of Congress.

281

282

Chapter 11

interest Groups

or late, interest groups have placed great emphasis
on developing grassroots support. Sometimes it is
impossible to develop such support. as when a complicated tax regulation of interest to only a few firm s
is being changed. But sometimes a proposed bill
touches a public nerve such that even busin esses ca n
help generate an outpouring of mail : when the Food
and Drug Administration announ ced it was going to
ban saccharin on the grounds that it caused cancer in
laboratory animals, the Calorie Co ntrol Council
(closely tied to the Coca-Cola Company, a big user of
saccharin in soft drinks such as Tab) ran newspaper
ads denouncing the policy. The public, worried about
losing access to an artificial sweetener important to
dieters, responded with an avalanche of mail to Congress, which promptly passed a law reversing the ban.
Usually, however, the public at large doesn't care
that much about an issue. and so interest groups will
try by direct- mail ca mpaigns to arouse a small but
paSS ionate group to write letters or vote (or not vote)
for speCified candidates. Beginning in 1970 Environmenta l Action deSignated certain members of the
House of Representatives as the "Dirty Dozen "
because of their votes against bills that the lobbying
group claimed were necessary to protect the environment. Of the thirty-on e members of Congress so
listed in various elections. only seven sur vived in
office. Many members of Congress believe that the
"Dirty Dozen" label hurts them with pro-environment voters in their districts. and though they a re
angry over what they feel is the unfair use of that
label. they strive to avoid it if at all possib le.
The press sometimes depicts certain large. wellfund ed interest groups as all-powerful. but few are.
Take, for example, the National Rifle Association
(NRA). Founded in 1871 as a group dedicated to
shooting instruction . the NRA in the 1960s and
19 70s beca me a lobby opposing policies that would
restrict citizens' rights to own and use firearms for
sporting and other legal purposes. By the 1980s the
RA's dues-paying membership had increased from
1 million to nearly 3 million. Its members receive
magazines, decals. and other direct benefits. From
198 3 to 1992 the NRA spent $8 million on congressional races both in direct contributions to their
favored candidates and in independent expenditures
supporting or opposing various ca ndidates. Still. in
the mid-1990s the NRA lost a major battle to repeal
ew Jersey's ban on certain types of semiautomatic
weapons and lost similar battles in Connecticut. Vir-

ginia. and other states. In 1993, over fierce opposition from the NRA. Congress passed the Brady bill. a
major piece of gun control legislation named a fter
Jim Brady, the press secretary who was shot and perman ently disabled during an attempt to assassinate
President Reagan. By the late 1990s the NRA had a
negative image even among most gun owners, and
the organization found itself constantly in the politica l cross hairs of small but media-savvy pro- gun
control lobbies such as Handgun Control, Inc. As the
NRA's recent history teaches, in American politics no
interest group, no matter how big its budget or mammoth its membership, is a lobby that cannot be beat.

Money and PACs
Contrary to popular suspicions. money is probably
one of the less effective ways by which interest
groups advance their causes. That was not always
the case. On ly a few decades ago powerful interests
used their bulging wallets to buy influence in Congress. The passage of the ca mpaign finance reform
law in 1973 changed that. The law had two effects.
FLrst, it sharply restricted the amount that any interest could give to a candidate for federal office (see
Chapter 10). Second, it made it legal for co rporation s
and labor unions to form politica l action committees
(PACs) that could make political contributions.
The effect of the second change was to encoura ge
the rapid growth of PACs. By 1993 some 4,200 PACs
existed. over six times the number that existed in
1975 . In 1999- 2000 they gave nea rly $260 million
to congressional candidates. Some people worry that
the existence of a ll this politica l money has resulted in
our having, as Senator Edward Kennedy put it, "the
finest Congress that money can buy." More likely the
increase in the number of PACs has had just the opposite effect. The reason is simple: with PACs so numerous a nd so easy to form. it is now probable that there
will be money available on every side of almost every
conceivable issue. As a result members of Congress
can take mon ey and still decide for themselves how to
vote. As we shall see, there is not much scholarly evidence that money buys votes in Congress.
Indeed, some members of Congress tell PACs what
to do rather than take orders from them. Members
will frequently inform PACs that they "expect"
money from them; grumbling PAC officials feel that
they have no choice but to contribute ('or fear of
a lienating the members. Moreover, so me members
have created their own PACs- organizations set up to

The Activities of Interest Groups
raise mon ey from individu al donors that is then
given to favored politica l allies in a nd out of Congress
or used to advance the members' own political a mbition s. Wh en Charles Rangel, congressman from New
York, was hoping to be elected whip of the Democratic party in the House, he set up a PAC that made
campaign contributions to fellow representatives in
hopes th at they might vote for him as whip. There are
many other examp les fro m both sides of the aisle. An
ironic consequence of this is tha t a conserva tive
Rep ubli ca n may give money to a PAC set up by a
moderate Democrat, who then gives the money to a
liberal Democrat (o r vice versa), with the res ult that
the original donor wind s up having his or her money
go to somebody th at he or she profound ly dislikes.
Almost any kind of organization- corporation,
labor union , tra de association , pub li c-interest lobby,
citizens group- can form a PAC. Over half of all
PACs are sponsored by corporations, about a tenth by
labor unions, a nd the rest by various groups, including ideologica l ones.
The rise of ideological PACs has been the most
remarkable development in in terest group activity in
recen t years. They h ave increased in number at a
fa ster rate than business or labor PACs, and in several
elections they raised more money than either business or labor. One study ca lcul ated that there were
more tha n one thousa nd ideological PACs: about onethird were liberal, about two-thirds conservative. 27
Though the ideological PACs raised more money
tha n business or labor ones, they spent less on campaig ns a nd gave less to candid ates. The reason for
thi s a nomaly is that an id eological PAC usually has
to raise its money by means of mass ive direct-mail
so licitations, expensive efforts that ca n consume all
the money raised, and more. By contrast, a typical
business or labor PAC solicits money from within a
single corporati on or union . Even a we ll -run ideological PAC must spend fifty cen ts to raise a dollar; some
spend mu ch more than that. 28
As Table 11.3 shows , of the ten PACs that gave the
most mon ey to candidates in the 2004 election, most
were labor uni ons, business organizations , a nd
groups that represented doctors, lawyers, realtors,
and gover nment employees.
Table 11.4 shows that, as we learned in Chapter
10, in cumbents received more PAC money tha n challengers and that, whereas labor PACs gave almost
exclusively to Democrats , business PACs favored
Republicans.

Committee

Contribution

Nationa l Association of Rea ltors
$2,106,733
1,994,500
Nat ional Beer Wh o lesalers Assoc iation
Intern at io nal Brot herhood of
1,71 4,900
Electrica l Wo rkers
1,700,700
Nationa l Associa t io n of Homebui lders
1,668,499
A ssociati on of Tri al Lawyers of America
1,592, 160
United Parce l Service, Inc.
Nationa l Auto mo bil e Dea lers Assoc iati on 1,547,100
1,484,000
W al-M art Stores, Inc.
1,428,705
Credit Union Legi slative Act ion Council
1,4 11 ,500
Servi ce Em pl oyees Internat io nal Union
* January 1, 2003, through June 30, 2004.
Source: Federal Election Commission.

Both par ties have become depend ent on PAC
money. Still, the popular image of r ich PACs stuffing
huge sums into polit ical campaigns a nd thereby buying the attenti on a nd possibly the favors of the grateful candidates is a bit overdrawn. For one thing, the
typical PAC contribution is rather small. The average
PAC donation to a House cand idate is on ly a few
hundred dollars and accounts for less than 1 percent
of the ca ndid ate's total receipts. Most PACs spread
sma ll sums of money over many candidates, a nd
despite their great growth in numbers a nd expenditures, PACs still provid e only about one-third of all
the money spent by ca ndid ates for the House. 29
Moreover, scholars have yet to find systematic evidence th at PAC contributions generally affect how
members of Congress vote. On most iss ues how legislators vote can be explained primarily by their general ideological outlooks and the cha racteristics of
th eir constituents: how much PAC money they have
received turns ou t to be a small factor. On the other
hand, when a n issue arises in which most of their
co nstituents h ave no interest and ideology provides
little guidance, there is a sligh t statistical correlation
between PAC contributions and votes. But even here
the correlation may be misleading. The same groups
that give money also wage intensive lobbying campaigns, flooding representatives with information,
press releases, and letters from interested co nstitu ents. What these stud ies may be measuri ng is
the effect of persuasive arguments, n ot dolla rs: no
one ca n be certain. 30

2 83

284

Chapter 11

Interest Groups

Spent Their Money in 2003-2004* (in millions of dollars)
Senate

House
PAC Sponsor

Oem.

Rep.

Incumbent

Corporate
Trade/professiona I
Labor
Nonconnected

$18.1
15.6
25 .2
6.0

$38.0
26.9
4.0
13.7

$53 .5
39.3
25.0
14.7

Challenger
$.83
1.1
2.2
2.3

Open

Oem.

Rep.

Incumbent

Challenger

Open

$1.7
2.1
2.0
2.6

$8.6
4.9
5.3
4 .5

$14.1
6.8
0.75
5.2

$18.5
9.3
4 .2
6.0

$1 .3
0.9
0.64
1.5

$2.9
1.5

1.3
2.2

* January 1. 2003 to June 30. 2004.
Source: Federal Election Commission.

It is possib le that money affects leg islative behavior in ways that will never appear in studies of rollcall votes in Congress. Members of Congress may be
more willing to set aside time in their busy schedules
for a group that has given money than for a group
th at has not. What the money has bought is access:
it has helped open the door. Or contributions might
influence how legislators behave on the committees
on which they serve. subtly shaping the way in
which they respond to arguments and the facts on
which they rely. No one knows. because the research
has not been done.
In any event. if interest group money makes a difference at all. it probably makes it on certain kinds of
issues more than others. In the chapter on policymaking we define the kind of issues-we call them
"client politics"-on which a given interest group is
likely to be especially inf1uential, whether by means
of arguments, money. or both. After reading that
chapter and considering the examples given there. it
will be easier to put the present discussion of PAC
money into context.

The {{Revolving Door"
Every year. hundreds of people leave important jobs
in the federal government to take more lucrative
positions in private industry. Some go to work as lobbyists, others as cons ultants to business, still others
as key executives in corporations, foundations, and
universities. Many peop le worry th at this "revolving
door" may give private interests a way of improperly
influencing government decisions. If a federal officia l
uses h is or her government position to do something
for a corporation in exchange for a cushy job after
leaving government, or if a person who has left government uses his or her personal contacts in Wash-

ington to get favors for private parties, then the public interest may suffer.
From time to time there are incidents that seem to
confirm these fears. Michael K. Deaver, once the
deputy chief of staff in the Reagan White House, was
convicted of perjury in connection with a grand jury
investigation of his having used his former government contacts to help the clients of his public relations firm. Lyn o[ziger, a former Reagan White
House aide. was convicted of violating the Ethics in
Government Act by lobbying the White House, soon
after he left it, on behalf of various businesses a nd
labor unions.
In 1988 federal investigators revealed evidence of
corrupt dealings between some Defense Department
officials and industry executives. Contractors and
their consu ltants, many of whom were former Pentagon personnel, obtained favors fro m procurement
officials, gaining an edge on their competitors.
How systematic is this pattern of abuse? We don't
know. Studies of the revolving door in federa l regulatory agencies have found no clear pattern of officials'
tilting their decisions in hopes of landing a lucrative
business job. 31
Agencies differ in their vulnerability to outside
influences. If the Food and Drug Ad mini stration is
not vigilant, people in that agency who help decide
whether a new drug shou ld be placed on the market
may have their judgment affected somewhat by the
possibility that, if they approve th e drug, the pharmaceutical company that makes it will later offer
them a lucrative position.
On the other hand, lawyers in the Federal Trade
Commission who prosecute businesses that violate the
antitrust laws may decide that their chances for getting
a good job with a private law ll[m later on will increase

The Activities of Interest Groups

285

HOW THINGS WORK
Conflict of Interest
In 1978 a new federal law, the Ethics in Government
Act, codified and broadened the rules governing
possible conflicts of interest among senior members
of the execut ive branch . The key provisions were as
follows .
The president, vice president, and top-ranking
(GS-16 and above) executive branch employees must
each year file a public financial disclosure report that
lists:

• Appear before an agency, for two years after leaving government service, on matters that came
w ithin the former employees' official sphere of
responsibility, even if they were not personally
involved in the matter
• Represent anyone on any matter before their former agencies, for one year after leaving them,
even if the former employees had no connection
with the matter while in t he government

• The source and amount of all earned income as
well as income from stocks, bonds, and property;
the worth of any investments or large debts; and
the source of a spouse's income, if any
• Any position held in business, labor, or certa in
nonprofit organ izations

In addition, another law prohibits bribery. It is illegal to ask for, solicit, or receive anything of value in
return for being influenced in the performance of
one's duties .
Finally, an executive order forbids outside employment. An official may not hold a job or take a fee,
even for lecturing or writing, if such employment or
income might create a confl ict of interest or an
apparent conflict of interest.

Employm ent after government service is restricted . Former executive branch employees may not:
• Represent anyone before their former agencies in
connection with any matter that the former
employees had been involved in before leaving
the government

if they are particularly vigorous and effective prosecutors. The [lrm, after a ll, wants to hire competent people,
and winning a case is a good test of competence. 32

Trouble
Pub lic displays and disruptive tactics- protest
marches , sit-ins, picketing, and vio lence-have
always been a part of American politics. Indeed, they
were a mong the favorite tactics of the American
colonists seeking independ ence in 17 76.
Both ends of the political spectrum have used display, disruption, and violence. On the left feminists,
antislavery ag itators, coal miners , autoworkers, welfare mothers, African Americans, antinuclear power
groups, publi c hou sing tenants, the American Indian Movement, the Students for a Democratic Society,
and th e Weather Underground have created "tro uble" ranging from peaceful sit-ins at segregated

Sources. National Journal (Novem ber 19, 1977): 1796-1803; Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report (October 28, 1978): 312 1- 3 127.

lunch counters to bomb ings and shootings. On the
righ t the Ku Klux Klan has u sed terror. intimidation.
and murder; parents opposed to forced busing of
schoolchi ldren have demonstrated; business firms
have u sed strong-arm squads against workers; rightto-life groups have blockaded abortion clinics; and
an end less array of "anti-" groups (anti-Catholics.
anti-Masons. anti-Jews. anti-immigrants. antis aloons. a ntiblacks. antiprotesters. and probably even
anti-antis) have taken their disruptive turns on stage.
These various activities are not morally the same-a
sit-in demonstration is quite different from a lynching- but politica lly they co nstitute a similar problem
for a government official.
An explanation of why and under what circumstances disruption occurs is beyond th e scope of this
book. To understa nd interest group politics. however.
it is important to remem ber that making trou bl e has.

286

Chapter 11

Interest Groups

Lawsuits, such as this one arguing that Massachusetts allow marriages among gay and lesbian
couples, are often more effective than protest demonstrations in changing policies.

since the 1960s, become a quite conventional political resource and is no longer simply the last resort of
extremist groups. Making trouble is now an accepted
political tactic of ordinary middle-class citizens as
well as the disadvantaged or disreputable.
There is of course a long history of the use of disruptive methods by "proper" people. In a movement
that began in England at the turn of the century and
then spread here, feminists would chain themselves
to lampposts or engage in what we now call "sit-ins"
as part of a campaign to win the vote for women. The
object then was much the same as the object of similar tactics today: to disrupt the working of some
institution so that it is forced to negotiate with you,
or. failing that, to enlist the sympathies of third parties (the media, other interest groups) who will come
to your aid and press your target to negotiate with
you. or, failing that, to goad the police into making
attacks and arrests so that martyrs are created.
The civil rights and antiwar movements of the
1960s gave experience in these methods to thousands of young people and persuaded others of the
effectiveness of such methods under certain conditions. Though these movements have abated or dis-

appeared. their veterans and emulators have put
such tactics to new uses- trying to block the construction of a nuclear power plant, for example, or
occupying the office of a cabinet secretary to obtain
concessions for a particular group.
Government officials dread this kind of trouble.
They usually find themselves in a no-win situation. If
they ignore the disruption, they are accused of being
"insensitive," "unresponsive," or "arrogant. " If they
give in to the demonstrators. they encourage more
demonstrations by proving that this is a useful tactic.
If they call the police. they run the risk of violence
and injuries. followed not only by bad publicity but
by lawsuits.

*"

Regulating Interest Groups

Interest group activity is a form of political speech
protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution: it cannot lawfully be abolished or even mu ch
curtailed. In 1946 Congress passed the Federal Regulation of Lobbying Act, which requires groups and
individuals seeking to influence legislation to register

Regulating Interest Groups

with the secretary of the Senate and the clerk of the
House and to me quarterly financial reports. The
Supreme Court upheld the law but restricted its
application to lobbying efforts involving direct contacts with members of Congress. 33 More general
"grassroots" interest group activity may not be
restricted by the government. The 1946 law had little practical effect. Not all lobbyists took the trouble
to register. and there was no guarantee that the
financial statements were accurate. There was no
staff in charge of enforcing the law.
After years of growing popular dissatisfaction with
Congress, prompted in large measure by the (exaggerated) view that legislators were the pawns of powerful
special interests, Congress in late 1995 unanimously
passed a bill that tightened up the registration and
disclosure requirements. Signed by the president, the
law restates the obligation of lobbyists to register with
the House and Senate, but it broadens the definition
of a lobbyist to include the following:
• People who spend at least 20 percent of their time
lobbying
• People who are paid at least $5.000 in any sixmonth period to lobby
• Corporations and other groups that spend more
than $20,000 in any six-month period on their
own lobbying staffs
The law covers people and groups who lobby the
exec utive branch and congressional staffers as well
as elected members of Congress, and it includes law
firms that represent clients before the government.
Twice a year, all registered lobbyists must report the
following:
• The names of their clients
• Their income and expenditures
• The issues on which they worked
The registration and reporting requirements do
not. however. extend to so-called grassroots organizations- that is. campaigns (sometimes led by volunteers. sometimes by hired professionals) to mobilize
citizens to write or call the government about some
issue. Nor was any new enforcement organization
created, although congressional officials may refer
violations to the Justice Department for investigation.
Fines for breaking the law could amount to $50,000.
In addition. the law bars tax-exempt, nonprofit advocacy groups that lobby from getting federal grants, a

provision aimed at organizations such as the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) .
The most Significant legal constraints on interest
groups come not from the current federal lobbying
law (though that may change) but from the tax code
and the campaign finance laws. A nonprofit organization- which includes not only charitable groups
but almost all voluntary associations that have an
interest in politics- need not pay income taxes. and
financial contributions to it can be deducted on the
donor's income tax return, provided that the organization does not devote a "substantial part" of its
activities to "attempting to inl1uence legislation."34
Many tax-exempt organizations do take public positions on political questions and testily before congreSSional committees. If the organization does any
serious lobbying, however, it will lose its tax-exempt
status (and thus find it harder to solicit donations
and more expensive to operate) . Exactly this happened to the Sierra Club in 1968 when the Internal
Revenue Service revoked its tax-exempt status
because of its extensive lobbying activities. Some
voluntary associations try to deal with this problem
by setting up separate organizations to collect
tax-exempt money- for example, the NAACP, which
lobbies, must pay taxes. but the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund. which does not lobby,
is tax-exempt.
Finally, the campaign finance laws, described in
detail in Chapter 10, limit to $5,000 the amount any
political action committee can spend on a given candidate in a given election. These laws have sharply
curtailed the extent to which any single group can
give money. though they have increased the total
amount that different groups are providing.
Beyond making bribery or other manifestly corrupt forms of behavior illegal and restricting the
sums that campaign contributors can donate. there
is probably no system for controlling interest groups
that would both make a useful differe nce and leave
important constitutional and political rights unimpaired. Ultimately the only remedy for imbalances or
inadequacies in interest group representation is to
devise and sustain a political system that gives all
affected parties a reasonable chance to be heard on
matters of public policy. That. of course, is exactly
what the Founders thought they were doing.
Whether they succeeded or not is a question to
which we shall return at the end of this book.

287

U.S. Senator Wants Feds
to Foot the Bill for
!,~~!~~~al Campaigns

MEMORANDUM
To: Senator Rita McCord
From: Jack Smith, chief of staff
Subject: Federal finance of campaigns

WASHTNGTON
" Calling th e coun try ,s ca
.
.
corrupt and complicated b: pa/gn fmance system
an ex-presidential CO/lte d yond comprehension "
'
IJ er and . .
,
CorraII rng congressional c
slttmg senator is
that would have th Ii d osponsors for a new law
h
e e eral a
en"re cost of president" I
"overnment pay the
Ja races and lead to full federal funding for co
ngresslDnal Ca mpaigns as well . . .

Every presidential election since 1976 has been financed in part
by federal funds, but the proposal in question would start by limiting major
presidential candidates to federal financing .
Arguments for:
1. The legal precedents are promising. Federal matching funds already go to
presidential -primary candidates who have raised at least a total of $5,000, in
contributions of $250 or less, in each of twenty states, and each major party
nominee is already eligible for federal grants if he or she agrees to spend no more
than the grant amount.
2. The sums required would be small. The hard money spent on presidential
campaigns totaled less than $1 billion-hardly a fiscal drain were it paid out of a
nearly $2 trillion annual federal budget.
3. The effects would be pervasive. Candidates and party leaders would stop covertly
courting soft-money suppliers, stop compromising themselves with big-money
donors (phone calls, luncheons, personal visits), and start focusing on the needs of
average citi zens.
Arguments against:
1. The constitutional precedents are prohibitive. The Supreme Court's Buckley v. Valeo
(1976) decision upheld legal limits on campaign contributions but defined spending
money for political purposes as a form of political expression protected by the First
Amendment.
2. The sums spent would soon spiral. The federal government would be unable to
restrict spending by individuals or organizations working independently, and
federal funds would supplement, not supplant, new private money.
3. The effects would be perverse. Candidates would rely less on party leaders, which
would further weaken the political parties. Many average citizens (most of whom
have not opted to help pay for campaigns through voluntary federal income tax
checkoffs) and nonvoters would feel as if they were being bullied into bankrolling a
process that serves the politicians, not the people.
Your decision:
Favor proposa l _ __

Oppose proposal _ __

Summary

'*

SUMMARY

I

nterest gro ups in the Un ited States are more
numerous and more fragmented than those in
nations such as Great Britain, where the political system is more centralized. The goals and tactics of
interest groups reflect not only the interests of their
members but also the size of the groups, the incentives with which they attract supporters, and the role

of their professional staffs. The chief source of interest group influ ence is information; public support,
money, and the ability to create "trouble" are also
important. The right to lobby is protected by the Constitution, but the tax and campaign finan ce laws
impose significant restrictions on how money may
be used.

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?

1. Do interest groups dominate government, and is

any particular lobby politically unbeatable?
The answers are "not really" and "no," respectively.
There are so many governmenta l institutions in
which power may be exercised that no single group
can dominate most public policy decisions. What the
government does is often the outcome of a complex
pattern of political haggling, innumerable compromises, and sh ifting alliances among and between different groups and their leaders. Even supposedly
all-powerful lobbies (like the National Rifle Association [NRA] on gun contro l. or the American Association of Retired Persons [AARP] on senior citizens'
hea lth care benefits) sometimes find themselves
on the los ing side of legis lative decisions and court
opinions.

2 . Why do people join interest groups?
Pretty much for the same basic reasons that people
join any organization. There are three kinds of incentives: solidary, material. and purposive. Organizations,
including interest groups, can attract members
through one, two, or all three incentives. Some interest
groups rely mainly on one incentive. For example, ideological political action committees (PACs) rely largely
on purposive incentives, attracting members by
appealing to their beliefs in a coherent set of principles
or their passions on a particular set of issues. Even
these groups, however, normally provide their members with certain tangible, members-only benefits (for
example. magazines or special discounts on various
products). Organizations that principally benefit nonmembers are sometimes ca lled public-interest lobbies.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. Is the proliferation of political action commit-

tees (PACs) and other groups good or bad for
Am erica's representative democracy?
What would James Madison say? Go back to the
Appendix and Federalist o. 10. Madison recognized
that freedom begat factions , but he hoped that the
government proposed under the Constitution would
succeed in "regulating these various and interfering
interests" in ways that secured the "public good."
The mere proliferation of interest groups in our time
does not justify a negative answer to that question.
Rather, one would also have to believe that the political process is dominated by groups that seek to serve
their members with little or no regard for the wellbeing and rights of other citizens. To some prochoice voters, certain pro- life groups may appear as
factions. and to some pro-life citizens, certa in prochoice groups may appear as factions. Both these

and other ideological groups have proliferated in
recent decades. Whether this is good or bad for
American's representative democracy is a question
on which reasonable minds can and do differ. But
this much is clear: in contemporary American politics, one citizen's special-interest group is often
another citizen's public-interest lobby.
2. Should interest groups' political activities be
restricted by law?
The first thing to notice is that there are already literally scores of such laws on the books. For example.
Washington lobbyists must register with the House or
Senate. All registered lobbyists must publicly divul ge
their client list and expend itures. There are legal limits on PAC contributions. Every new wave of campaign finance laws (see Chapter 10) h as resulted in
more rules regulating interest groups. The Internal

289

290

Chapter 11

Interest Groups

Revenue Service (IRS ) has tightly restricted political
activity by religious gro ups, private schoo ls, a nd
other organ izations as a condition for their exempti on
from federal income tax, The courts have co nsistently
upheld such restrictions and ruled that th ey do not.
under most circumstances, vio late freedom of speech

or other constitutiona l protections. On the other
hand. the courts h ave effectively afford ed even taxexempt groups ways of lega lly, but indirectly, engagin g in po litical activity. Fina lly, states a nd cities have
their ow n laws regulating interest groups, and some
places are more restricti ve tha n others.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

Conservative interest gro ups
American Conservative Union:
www.conservative.org
Christian Coa lition: www.cc.org
Liberal interest groups
American Civ il Liberties Union: www.aclu.org
Americans for Democratic Action:
www.adaction.org
Env ironmental groups
Env ironmental Defense:
www.environmentaldefense.org

ationa l Resources Defense Co un cil :
www.nrdc.org
Civ il rights groups
NAACP: www.naacp.org
Center for Equa l Opportunity: www.ceousa.org
Feminist group
ational Organization for Women: www.now.org

SUGGESTED READINGS
Ba uer, Raymon d A" Ith icl de So la Pool. a nd Lew is A. Dex ter. Alllel'iC1l11 1311sillcSS alld Plib/ic Polil".'l. New York: At her to n. 19fi 3 . A
cla ss ic study of how bu sin ess grou ps tri ed to sh ape fo reign trad e legis lati on. set in a broad ana lysis of pressure g roups and
Con gress .
Berry. Jeffrey M. Lobbyillg Jar tile People. Prin ceto n. N.J.: Prin ceto n
Un iversity Press. 19 77. Analyzes more than eighty "publicinterest"" lobbi es. w ith a detai led di sc ussion or two.
Cigler. All a n j .. and Burdett A. Loomis. cds. Illterest Grol/p Politics.
4 th cd. Was hi n gton . D.C. : Co n gressio nal Quarterly Press.
19 95. Essays on several interest gro ups acti ve in Washin gton .
Lowi. Theodore j. Tile Elld oJ UIJem/islIl. New Yo rk: Norton. 1969. A
critique of th e role o f interest gro u ps in America n governm en t..
Ma lbin. Mich ael j .. cd. MOlley 1111(/ Politics ill the Ull ited States.
Chatham. N.j.: Ch a th a m House. 19S4. Excelle nt studies of
PACs a nd of th e infl uence of mon ey in electi ons.
Mansb ridge. j a ne j. W /lY We Lost tile ERA. Ch icago: Uni versity o f
Chicago Press. 1 986. In sightful ana lys is of th e relationsh ip
between organ izati o na l incentives a nd tactics in t h e ERA
ca nlpai gn.

Ol so n . Ma nc ur. Tile Logic oJ Colleel ive Act.ioll. Cambr idge: Ha r va rd
Un iversity Press. 1 965. An eco n omi c a na lys is of interest
groups. especia lly t he "free- rider" proble m.
Sabato. Larry. PAC Power. New York : Norton . 1985. A full disc ussion of the na ture and acti vities of po li tica l action co mmillees.
Sch lozman. Kay Lehman. and j ohn 'T: Tiern ey. Orga l/i zed II/ terests
alld Alileriml/ IJelllocrnc!J. New Yo rk : Ha rper and Row. 19S5.
Compre he nsive treatise on interest groups based on original
research.
Trum a n. Dav id 13. Til e GOllcnllllel/ ta/ Process. 2d cd. New York :
Knop f. 19 7 1. First published in 195 1. this wa s t he classic
ana lys is- a nd dcl"ensc--of interest gro up plura lism.
Wi lso n. ja mes Q. Politim/ Orqallizatioll s. Rev. cd. Princeton, N.j. :
Prin ceto n Uni verS ity Prcss. 1995. A th eo ry or in terest gro ups
cmpha sizin g th e in centives th ey u se to allractmembers.

CHAPTER

12

The Media

Journalism in American Political
History
The Party Press • The Popular Press •
Magazines of Opinion • Electronic
Journalism • The Internet

The Structure of the Media
Degree of Competition •
The National Media

Rules Governing the Media
Confidentiality of Sources • Regulating
Broadcasting • Campaigning

Are the National Media Biased?
Government and the News
Prominence of the President •
Coverage of Congress • Why Do
We Have So Many News Leaks? •
Sensationalism in the Media •
Government Restraints on Journalists

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1. What public policies will the media
support?

2.

How much power do the media
have?
Can we trust the media to be fair?

M

292

Uch of what you know about politics comes from what you read in
newspapers , watch on television, or listen to on the radio. And if
you like using the computer, a lot more can be learned from World Wide
Web pages and the various chatrooms and web logs (or blogs) that you can
find there. Blogs have become so important that many people now consider
them the New Media that is challenging the Old Media (newspapers and television stations) by providing immediate checks on what the latter says. In
2004,60 Minutes, a CBS television news program, ran a story claiming that
documents it had proved that President Bush h ad performed poorly during
his service in the Air National Guard. Within hours bloggers were showing
evidence that the documents were forgeries, a fact th at CBS later admitted
was true. Somebody gave the forgeries to CBS; the Web discovered that fact.
The mass media and the Internet are essentially unregulated ventures,
accountable for their content chiefly to themselves and their users. But if
the media regulate themselves, wi ll they be honest and fair? And how will
politicians deal with them?
All public officials have a love-hate relationship with newspapers, television, and the other media of mass communication. They depend on the
media for the advancement of their careers and policies but fear the media 's
power to criticize, expose, and destroy. As political parties have declinedespecially, strong local party organizations-politicians have become
increasingly dependent on the media. Their efforts to woo the press have
become ever greater, and their expressions of rage and dismay when that
courtship is spurned, ever stronger. At the same time, the media have been
changing, especially in regard to the kinds of people who have been attracted to leading positions in journalism and the attitudes they h ave brought
with them. Th ere has always been an adversarial relationship between
those who govern and those who write, but events of recent decades have,
as we sh all see, made that conflict especially keen.
The relationships between government and the media in this country are
shaped by laws and understandings that accord the media a degree of freedom greater than that found in almost any other nation. Though many public officials secretly might like to control the media, and though no medium of
communication in the United States or elsewhere is totally free of government
influence, the press in this country is among the freest in the world. A study
of 193 countries found that in about one-third the press enjoyed a high
degree of freedom: the United States and most nations in Europe are among
these places.1 But even in some democratic nations with a free press there are
restrictions that would be unfamiliar to Americans. For example, the laws

Journali sm in American Political History

., ~-

-...

...

_ _ 21W1.2OD:SaI . t.AUMr

" ""h ......

293

,

~---~ FCwEF\ L.,;Xr::=iE~~
FEBRUARY 23. 2005
MEDIA AbEB T

Stoom "-. t.rod • •"O( .tlh'''"'~'''''''-' '''''''''"_''''''"

... IIII.Pl.·CIO,II<A.

.
_nUtlwlS*!IU_1III
.._ _" .;;o.;het_....:
., r.;tet_ ....o:IIeIo..OIio• ......ua/l(;lIl't1
••fN ..
...... "..
..........
",_tIIooco..nnt""
...........
b.__
OI.d.,_.tonoolnt.>
.....___
_ .....
- ' c... ." ";wftOod • • .-; .. ..<tot.
,1 ....

...

.n_... .," ...'. . . .

tto_tO* t.~ .~eoian·.$II

..

tII .....
UI ............... RIU-........... ""O~_
_)I.I ..
(SOOO , ....... , ......... ·. _

...... NI..(;lOf • •

search

! am seheduled to all!)l¥, ~v" on MSNtlCJ "COM«Ud" oroor.m.r 5:00 Oll'!. (ElStemj.
The topoewill be Prelfd'nt 6ush'l tnp to Evroc.

_n

a. ..... ~Ior ............ ,<A1h<o~1Wj.,_ ....,_"'. _.' . ..... ,_
~.........-.

)

· W E C A N SEE I T"

_ _._--

Don't fI1IU til .. ta illmn bY O,.,d IQ ........ I on the "Ltb_lllI'"ItlI'.dl." It rw:kJcIes On
QUOtabOnfromt"-intII~'·II. .d.r,W"<lJumbl.tt;

_-_

It'S str.-.oe fOf" 1M to SI' it. but th.s j)rOCell of

_ _ ... _

.. _ . _ ....... """ . ... - . , . .. _ _ ........ "Y...

don" ...., ....... .... _ : " " ..... ·w..... .. _
~
__
.. _
. ,J ..
.. I""' .... h_
... IO
_
......... _
, _
_~

e........ .,
~ .. werlln,.,e,.dbulr.~m.U.< .. m

.............. .... ,' lu.o' _ _ _
.,.·--.-.rol_:
.. ,........ __
so ••
I ......, _ - . . ·

.....
"90.'

ottheAnw~..,...$ionotlr".I

~....""::.~..."::-"':.~~.y:::.::=:..:=~~.:~~..:
.....
........................
....

cNooe hu start.d Maus'

sC1f'l(.~!r".aut whetllnwthe

tr..-qI)eOPlli .0000ttw.e ......ks
million otthotm, It ..... the SUrtot.
rww Ar.b world . The S,.n.n peOOIt;, the eQI~ HOPIe • .n
th«
s.omethwlgisc:hang!no.TheaerllnW8lMS •.nefl.WIC¥!, •• C.

ttl.

ASSf •• ot"

ft

~5S

,,,,,"'2

:"'.:.:::.~....=."':;.::~'!:'.:.,-;:.~r:"'~~=:;:.N:..::~:;::.=~

••
, ......... ....." .........""-.,._ ..·_
...... ool"-'9
","",",
__ .0, .v..................
__ ............. '""-....... ..-_
...
_,_~

_.....

"~_

. . . o--t_,..,.

THE LIMIT' OF CHARM

Blogs, both liberal and conservative, have become a major
source of news and politics.

governin g libel are much stricter in Great Britain than
in th e Un ited States. As a result. it is easier in the former country for politicians to sue newspapers for publishin g articles that defame or ridicule them. In this
country th e libel laws make it almost impossible to prevent press criticisms of public fi gures. Moreover, Engla nd has an Official Secrets Act that can be used to
punish any past or present public officia ls who leak
information to the press.2 In thi s co untry, leak ing
information occurs all of the time a nd our Freedom of
Information Act makes it relatively easy for the press to
extract documents from the government.
In Italy the prime minister ow ns a large media
empire that he can use to build support for him and
his party. In Fra nce it has been possible in the recent
past to punish a newspaper for being excessively critica l of the French presid ent, 3
America has a long tradition of privately own ed
media. By co ntrast. private ownership of television
has come only recently to Fra nce. And the Internet is
not ow ned by anybody: here a nd in ma ny nations,
peop le ca n say or read whatever they want by mea ns
of their computers.
Newspapers in this country requi re no government permission to operate, but rad io a nd television
stations do need licenses that are gra nted by th e Federa l Co mmunications Co mmiss io n (FCC). These
licenses must be renewed periodically. On occasion
the White House has made efforts to use license
renewa ls as a way of influencin g sta ti on owners who
were out of political fa vor, but of late the level of FCC
control over what is broadcast has lessened.

PAR T T W O

Haword Kur11reQOttl onJ.IfJlrvls·d"I.rmotf....S!y •. )¥VIS,.n.~otIIerott.ntn5t
bIoQQe>r. would Ilk, .. IIOW'WOW on whoc:tl c.rt.,n bI~oef1i get too-thlr wCh
reore:s......ts ot\:tle New York TIITIH ¥Id oe.N'DI otherMSM stalwarts. 6dI KI!"II..-,
lxec:utT<o• • dotorolth4r Tme.,oo.,"lthinkm.tlYlUl:hwould.crompllstM-dby SUc!l'Qlttoolttl'ortr. HOW'~IIf. hit ~looodeOCll wiltll ......isls oettInG to ooint th.lt It constitutes it
~ of sorts.IC,""" r"oonle' !'\Iv, been WIttY -.1d ,h.rp.. dQed tnOUQhto
s~thethe·stheh\dalQuyon,wouIdhk'tom ..t .
~ bottom Ion', thouQh, If the\; the only m..nonoful w.y for til. MSM .nd bIoQQ'r1 to oet
to "'lOw on. enothe<"lf thrOUOh thelf",oort.no end eomment.ry. 8100\1&<'1. of COUl'1t,
__ edy know the NSM beuus, w,'ye be~ consumers alltl product tor decades. Thll
onI,w.,lorthe MSMtoth.. mut;tto~ntly~tII .. torodvct.

There a re two potential limits to the freedom of
privately owned newspapers a nd broadcast stations.
The fi rst is the fact th at they must make a profit.
Some cri tics believe that the need for pro fi t will lead
media outlets to distort th e news in order to satisfy
advertisers or to build an aud ience. Though there is
some truth to this argument. it is too simp le. Every
media outlet must satisfy a variety of people- advertisers. subscribers . listeners, reporters, a nd editorsand ba la ncin g th ose dem and s is complicated a nd w ill
be done differently by different own ers.
The second problem is media bias. If most of the
reporters a nd edi tors have simil a r views about politics
and if they act on those views, then the media will
give us only one side of ma ny stories. Later in this
chapter we sha ll ta ke a cl ose look at th is possibility.

Journalism in Alnerican
Political History
Importa nt changes in the nature of American politics
have gone hand in hand with major changes in the
orga nization and technology of the press. It is the
nature of politics, being essentially a form of communication, to respond to changes in how communications
blog

series, or log, of discussion items on a
page of the World W ide Web.

r
i

294

Chapter 12

The Media

".

~. P "~NtA",

" ....1', . .... .... ... . .... .. . .......

1••,.0.,••.. ,.._....

W Ii 0 N E S 0 A Y, J anuull. 1191·

( Too:1.I No.

I J}. ]

Th e National Gazette. edited by Philip Freneau. supported the Thomas Jejfersol1factioll ill
natiol1al politics. Jeffersoll. as secretary of state. helped Frel1eau by giving him a job in the State
Departmel1t. The Gazette of the United States. published by Johl1 Felll1o. supported JefFerson's
rival, Alexal1der Hamilton.

are carried on. This can be seen by considering four
important periods in journalistic history.

The Party Press
In the early years of the Republic. politicians of various factions and parties created. sponsored. and controlled newspapers to further their interests. This
was possible because circulation was of necessity
small (newspapers co uld not easi ly be distributed to
large audiences. owing to poor transportation) and
newspapers were expensive (the type was set by hand
and the presses printed copies slowly). Furthermore.
there were few large advertisers to pay the bills.
These newspapers circulated chiefly among the politica l and commercial elites. who could afford the high
subscription prices. Even with high prices. the news-

papers. to exist. often required subsidies. That money
frequently came from the government or from a
political party.
During the Washington administration the Federalists, led by Alexander Hamilton, created the Gazette
of the United States. The Republicans. led by Thomas
Jefferson, retaliated by creating the National Gazette
and made its editor. Philip Freneau, "clerk for foreign langu ages " in the State Department at $250 a
year to help support him. After Jefferson became
president, he induced another publisher. Samuel
Harrison Smith. to start the Natio nal IntelIigenCCl;
subsidizing him by giving him a contract to print
government documents. Andrew Jackson, when he
became president, aided in the creation of the Washillgtoll Globe. By some estimates there were over fifty

Journalism in American Political History
journalists on the government payroll during this
era. 4 Naturally these newspapers were relentlessly
partisan in their views. Citizens could choose among
different party papers. but only rarely could they find
a paper that presented both sides of an issue.

The Popular Press
Changes in society and technology made possible the
rise of a self-supporting. mass-readership daUy newspaper. The development of the high-speed rotary press
enabled publishers to print thousands of copies of a
newspaper cheaply and quicldy. The invention of the
telegraph in the 1840s meant that news from Washington could be flashed almost immediately to New
York. Boston, Philadelphia, and Charleston, thus providing local papers with access to information that
once only the Washington papers enjoyed. The creation in 1848 of the Associated Press allowed telegraphic dissemination of information to newspaper
editors on a systematic basis. Since the AP provided
stories that had to be brief and that went to newspapers of every political hue, it could not afford to be
partisan or biased; to attract as many subscribers as
possible, it had to present the facts objectively. Meanwhile the nation was becoming more urbanized, with
large numbers of people brought together in densely
settled areas. These people could support a daily newspaper by paying only a penny per copy and by patronizing merchants who advertised in its pages.
Newspapers no longer needed political patronage to
prosper, and soon such subsidies began to dry up. In
1860 the Government Printing Office was established,
thereby putting an end to most of the printing contracts that Washington newspapers had once enjoyed.
The mass-readership newspaper was scarcely
nonpartisan, but the partisanship it displayed arose
from the convictions of its publishers and editors
rather than from the influence of its party sponsors.
And these convictions blended political beliefs with
economic interest. The way to attract a large readership was with sensationalism: violence, romance,
and patriotism. coupled with exposes of government.
politics. business, and society. As practiced by Joseph
Pulitzer and William Randolph Hearst, founders of
large newspaper empires, this editorial policy had
great appeal for the average citizen and especially for
the immigrants flooding into the large cities.
Strong-willed publishers could often become powerful political forces. Hearst used his papers to agitate
for war with Spain when the Cubans rebelled against
Spanish rule. Conservative Republican political lead-

ers were opposed to the war. but a steady diet of
newspaper stories about real and imagined Spanish
brutalities whipped up public opinion in favor of
intervention. At one point Hearst sent the noted
artist Frederic Remington to Cuba to supply paintings of the conflict. Remington cabled back: "Everything is quiet.. .. There will be no war." Hearst
supposedly replied: "Please remain. You furnish the
pictures and I'll furnish the war. "s When the battleship USS Maine blew up in Havana harbor, President
William McKinley felt helpless to resist popular pressure, and war was declared in 1898.
For all their excesses, the mass-readership newspapers began to create a common national culture,
to establish the feasibility of a press free of government control or subsidy, and to demonstrate how
exciting (and profitable) could be the criticism of
public policy and the revelation of public scandal.

Magazines of Opinion
The growing middle class was often repelled by what
it called "yellow journalism" and was developing,
around the turn of the century, a taste for political
reform and a belief in the doctrines of the progressive
movement. To satisfy this market, a variety of national magazines appeared that, unlike those devoted to
manners and literature, discussed issues of public policy. Among the first of these were the Nation, the
Atlantic Monthly , and Harper 's, founded in the 1850s
and 1860s; later there came the more broadly based
mass-circulation magazines such as McClure 's, Scribner's, and Cosmopolitan. They provided the means for
developing a national constituency for certain issues,
such as regulating business (or in the language of the
times, "trustbusting"), purifying municipal politics,
and reforming the civil service system. Lincoln Steffens and other so-called muckrakers were frequent
contributors to the magazines, setting a pattern for
what we now call "investigative reporting."
The national magazines of opinion provided an
opportunity for individual writers to gain a nationwide following. The popular press, though initially
under the heavy influence of founder-publishers,
made the names of certain reporters and columnists
household words. In time the great circulation wars
between the big-city daily newspapers started to
wane. as the more successful papers bought up or
otherwise eliminated their competition. This reduced
the need for the more extreme forms of sensationalism, a change that was reinforced by the growing
sophistication and education of America's readers.

295

296

Chapter 12

The Media

Before television and the Internet, news came by radio, as here in
1939.

And the founding publishers were gradu ally repl aced
by less fl a mboyant ma nagers. All of these changesin circulation needs, in a udience in terests, in ma nagerial sty le, in the emergence of nationally known
writers- helped increase the power of editors a nd
reporters and make them a force to be reckoned with.
Although politi cs dominated the pages of most
national magazines in the late nineteenth century,
today national magazin es that foc us ma inly on po litics a nd government affairs account [or only a small
and declining portion of the national magazine market. Among all magazines in circ ulation today, only a
fraction focus on politics-the majority of tod ay's
magazines fo cus on popula r entertainment and
leisure activities.

Electronic Journalism
Radio came on the national scen e in the 1920s, television in the late 194 0s. They represented a major
change in the way news was gathered and disseminated, thou gh few politicians at first understood the
importance of this cha nge. A broadcast permits public offici als to speak directly to audiences without
their remarks being fil tered th rough editors and
reporters. This was obviously a n adva ntage to po liticia ns, prov ided they were skilled enough to use it:
they could in theory reach the voters di rectly on a
sound bi te
spea king .

A ra di o or vid eo clip of som eone

national scale without the ser vices of political parties, interest groups, or friend ly editors.
But there was an offsetting disadvantage- people
could easily ignore a speech broadcast on a radio or
telev ision sta tion. either by not listening at all or by
tuning to a different stati on. By contrast, the views of
at least some public figures would receive prominent
and often unavoid able display in newspapers, a nd in a
growing number of cities there was only one daily
paper. Moreover. space in a newspaper is cheap compared to time on a television broadcast. Adding one
more story, or one more n ame to an existing story,
costs the newspaper little. By contrast. less news can
be carried on radio or television, and each news segment must be quite brief to avoid boring the audience.
As a result, the number of political personalities that
can be covered by radio and television news is much
smaller than is the case with newspapers, and the
cost (to the station) of making a news item or broadcast longer is often prohibitively large.
Thus, to obtain the advantages of electronic media
coverage, public officials must do something suJfi ciently bold or colorful to gain free access to radio and television news--or they must find the money to purchase
radio and television time. The president of the United
States, of course. is routinely covered by radio and television a nd ca n ordinarily get free time to speak to the
nation on matters of importance. All other officials
must struggle for access to the electronic media by
making controversial statements, acquiring a national
reputation, or purchasing expensive time.
The rise of the talk show as a political forum has
increased politicians' access to the electronic media, as
has the televised "town meeting." But such developments need to be understood as part of a larger story.
Until the 1990s, the "big three" television networks (ABC, CBS, and NBC) together claimed 80 percent or more of all viewers (see Table 12.1). Their
evening newscasts domin ated electronic media coverage of politics and governmen t affair s. When it
came to presidentia l ca mpaigns, for examp le, the
three networks were the on ly telev ision games in
town- they reported on the primaries, broad cast the
party conventions, and covered the general election
campaigns. includ ing any pres idential debates. But
over the last few deca des, the netwo rks' even ing
newscasts have changed in ways that have made it
ha rder [or candid ates to use them to get their messages across. For instance, the average sound bi tea v ideo cl i p of a presiden tial contend er speaking-

Journalism in American Political History

Table 12.1

1 1.;;Io-::u.w;:ft&&l
1.:.

••

"Big Three" Networks: Average Shares of Prime-Time
Viewing Audience
Year

Share

1961
1971
1981
1991
1997
2002

94%
91
83
41
33
29

Source: Updated from The Public Perspective (September/October
1992): 6, reporting data provided by Nielsen Media Research and
NBC. Used by permission of The Public Perspective, a publication
of the Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of
Connecticut; Cabletelevision Advertising Bureau analysis of
Nielsen data, April 25, 2002-May 21,2002.

dropped from about forty-two seconds in 1968 to 7.3
seconds in 2000. (,
Today politicians have sources other than the network news for sustained and personalized television
exposure. Cable television, early-morning news and
entertainment programs, and prime-time "newsmagazine" shows have greatly increased and diversified politicians' access to the electronic media. One of
the most memorable moments of the 1992 presidential campaign-Ross Perot's declaring his willingness to run for president on CNN's "Larry King
Live"-occurred on cable television. In 2003 Arnold
Schwarzenegger announced that he would run for
governor of Ca lifornia on "The Tonight Show with
Jay Leno. " And wh il e the networks' evening news
programs feature only small sound bites, their earlymorning programs and newsmagazine shows feature lengthy interviews with candidates.
Naturally many politicians favor the call-in format, town-meeting setups, lengthy human interest
interviews, and casual appearances on entertainment shows to televised confrontations on policy
issues with seasoned network journalists who push,
probe, and criticize. And naturally they favor being a
part of visually interesting programs rather than traditional "talking heads" news shows. But what is
preferable to candidates is not necessarily helpful to
the selection process that voters must go through in
choosing a candidate. No one has yet systematically
analyzed what, if any, positive or negative consequences these recent changes in politicians' access to

the electronic media hold for campaigns, elections,
or governance. Nor. for that matter, is there yet any
Significant research on the broader societal consequences of so-called narrowcasting- the proliferation of television and radio stations that target
highly segmented listening and viewing aud iences,
and the relative decline of electronic and print media
that reach large and heterogeneous populations.
One thing is clear: most politicians crave the media
spotlight, both on the campaign trail and in offtce. The
efforts made by political cand id ates to get "visuals"filmed stories-on television continue after they are
elected. Since the president is always news, a politician
wishing to make news is well advised to attack the
president. Even better, attack him with the aid of a
photogenic prop: when the late Senator John Heinz III
of Pennsylvania wanted to criticize a president's
bridge-repair program, Heinz had himself filmed making the attack not in his offtce but stancling on a bridge.

The Internet
The newest electronic source of news is the Internet.
In 2000 over half of all American households had at
least one computer, and in four out of every ten
households someone used the Internet. 7 The political
news that is found there ranges from summaries of
stories from newspapers and magazines to political
rumors and hot gossip. Many web logs, or blogs, exist
on which viewers can scan political ideas posted
there; many blogs specialize in offering liberal. conservative, or libertarian perspectives. The Internet is
the ultimate free market in political news: no one can
ban, control. or regulate it, and no one can keep
facts , opinions, or nonsense off of it.
The Internet is beginning to playa big role in politics. When Howard Dean ran for the Democratic
presidential nomination in 2004, he raised most of
his money from Internet appeals. When John Kerry,
who won the nomination, was campaigning, the
Internet and the blogs on it were a major source of
discussion of the criticisms made of him by former
Vietnam war veterans. Now every candidate for
important offices has a web site.
The rise of the Internet has completed a remarkable
transformation in American journalism. In the days of
the party press only a few people read newspapers.
When mass-circulation newspapers arose, there also
arose mass politics. When magazines of opinion developed, there also developed interest groups. When rad io
and television became dominant, politicians could
build their own bridges to voters without party or

297

298

Chapter 12

The Media

interest group influence. And now. with the Internet.
voters and political activists can talk to each other.

* The Structure of the Media
The relationship between journalism and politics is a
two-way street: though politicians take advantage as
best they can of the communications media availab le
to them. these media in turn attempt to use poli tics
and politicians as a way of both entertaining and
informing their audiences. The mass media. whatever their disclaimers. are not simply a mirror held up
to reality or a messenger that carries the news. There
is inev itably a process of selection. of editing. and of
emphasis. and this process reflects. to some degree.
the way in which the media are organ ized. the kinds
of audiences they seek to serve. and the preferences
and opinions of the members of the media .

Figure 12.1

-

Young People Have Become Less Interested in
Political News
Age under 30

-

Age 30 to 49

-

Age 50 and over

1.2

1.1

42::>
if)

l" 1.0

roc
Q

roc
'0 0.9
x
<1!
U

-=
0 .8

19405

19505

19605

19705

1990

The three lines show how attentive people of different ages were to
news stories during the 1940s, 1950s, 1960s, and 1990. The tan line
represents those under age 30, the blue line those 30-49, and the red
line those 50 and older
Source: Los Angeles Times, Times Mirror Center for the People and the
Press (June 28, 1990)

Degree of Competition
There has been a large decline in the numbers of
daily newspapers that serve la rge communities.
There were competing papers in 60 percent of American cities in 1900 but in only 4 percent in 1972.
Several large cities-Boston. Chicago. Detroit. Los
Angeles. New York. Philadelphia. and Washington.
D.C.- have more than one paper. but in some of
these the sa me business owns both papers. This ownership pattern is called a joint operating agreement. or
JOA. Supposedly a JOA all ows the business side to
merge whi le preserving editorial independence. but
sometimes that independence is not very large. JOAs
co ntrol the papers in Denver. Detroit. Cincinnati.
Seattle. and a few other cities. And newspaper circulation has fallen in recent years. with more and more
people getting their news from radio and television.
Young people especially have turned away from
political news. as one can see in Figure 12.l.
Unlike newspapers . radio and television are
intensely competitive. Almost eve ry American home
has a radio and a television set. Though there are
only five major television networks. there are over
one thousand television stations. each of whi ch has
its own news programs. Loca l stations affili ated with
a network are free to accept or reject network programs. There are more than eleven thousand cable
TV systems. serving over 50 million people (a nd a
typical cable can carry dozens of ch annels). In addition there are nearly ten thousand radio stations;
some broadcast nothing but news. and others devel op a specialized following among blacks. Hispanics.
or other minorities. Magazines exist for every conce ivab le in terest. The number of news sources availab le to an America n is vast- more than even
dedicated readers and viewers can keep up with.
To a degree that would astonish most foreigners. the
American press-radio. television . and newspapersis made up of locally owned and managed enterprises.
In Britain. France. Germany. Japan. Sweden. and elsewhere. the media are owned and operated with a
national audience in mind. The Times of London may
be published in that city. but it is read throughout Great
Britain. as are the Guardian. the Daily Telegrapll , and the
Daily MirrOl: Radio and television broadcasts are centrally planned and nationally aired.
The American newspaper. however, is primarily
oriented to its local market and local audience, and
th ere is typically more local than national news in it.

The Structure of the Media

299

Radio and television stations accept network programming, but the early- and late-evening news prog ra ms
provide a heavy diet of loca l political, socia l. a nd sports
news. Government regulations developed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) are in part
responsible for this. Until the mid-1990s, no one could
own and operate more than one newspaper. one AM
radio station, one FM radio station, or one television
station in a given market. The networks still today may
not compel a local affiliate to accept any particular
broadcast. (In fact a lmost all network news programs
are carried by the affiliates.) The result has been the
development of a decentralized broadcast industry.

The National Media
The loca l orientation of mu ch of the American communications media is partia lly offset, however, by the
emergence of certain publi cations and broadcast services that constitute a kind of national press. The wire
ser vices- the Associated Press and United Press International-supply most of the nationa l news that
local papers publish. Certa in newsmagazin es- Time.
Newsweek, US. News & World Report- have a national
readership. The network evening news broadcasts produced by ABC, CBS, and NBC are carried by most television stations with a network affiliation. Both CNN
(Cable News Network) and Fox News broadcast news
around the clock and have large audiences. as does
MSNBC. Though most newspapers have only local
audiences, several have acquired nation al influence.
The New York Times and the Wall Street Journal a re
printed in severa l locations a nd can be delivered to
ma ny homes early in the morning. USA Today was created as a nationa l newspaper and is distributed everywhere. aimed especially at people who travel a lot.
These newspapers have national standing for several reaso ns. First. they di stribute a lot of copies: over
1 million eac h day for th e Tillles and the Journal, and
over 2 million a day for USA 'Today. Second, these
papers. as well as the Wasilington Post, are carefully
followed by politica l elites. Unlike most people, the
elites even read the ed itorials. By co ntrast, loca l
newspapers a nd radio stations may be invisible to
Washington politicians. Third. radio and telev ision
stations often decide what to broadcast by looking at
the fron t pages of the Tim es and the Post. One study
showed that the front page of the Tim es was a model
for each network's evening news broadcast. s Fina lly.
the editors and reporters for the n atio na l press tend
to be better educated and more generously paid than
their counterparts in loca l outlets. And as we sh a ll

To help rench voters directly without goillg througlr reporters,
political lenders. Stich ns Vice Presidell t Dick Cheney, nppear 011
television progrnllls such ns Meet tire Press.
see. the writers for the national press tend to have
distinctly liberal politica l views. Above a ll th ey
seek- and frequently obtain- the opportunity to
write stories that are not accounts of a particular
news event but "background," investigative. or interpretive stories about issues and policies.
The nationa l press plays the role of gatekeeper.
scorekeeper, and watchdog for the federal govern ment.
• Gatekeeper As gatekeeper it can influence what
subjects become national political issues and for how
long. Automobile safety, water pollution, and the quality of prescription dru gs were not major politica l issues before the national press bega n giving
substantial attention to th ese matters and thus helped
place them on th e pol itica l agenda. When crime rates
rose in the ea rly 1960s. the subj ect was given little
political attention in Washington, in part beca use the
media did not cover it extensively. Med ia attention to
crime increased in the late 1960s and ea rly 1970s,
slackened in the late 1970s, and rose aga in in the
1980s and early 1990s. Throughout most of these
years crime went up. In short, reality did not change
during this time; on ly the focus of media and political
attention shifted. Elite opinion about the war in Vietnam also changed signiflcantly as the attitude toward
th e war expressed by the national media changed.
• Scorekeeper As scorekeepers the nationa l media
keep tra ck of a nd help make political reputations.

300

Chapter 12

The Media

note who is being "mentioned" as a presidential candidate, and help decide who is winning and losing in
Washington politics. When Jimmy Carter, a virtually
unknown former governor of Georgia, was planning
his campaign to get the Democratic nomination for
president, he understood clearly the importance of
being "mentioned." So successful was he in cultivating members of the national press that. before the
first primary election was held , he was the subject of
more stories in the New York Times, the Washillgtoll
Post, and the Columbus Dispatch than any other potential Democratic presidential candidate.
The scorekeeper role of the media often leads the
press to cover presidential elections as if they were
horse races rather than choices among policies. Consider the enormous attention the media give to the
Iowa caucus and the New Hampshire primary election. despite the fact that these states produce only a
tiny fraction of the delegates to either party's nominating convention and that neither state is representative of the nation as a whole. The results of the Iowa
caucus. the first in the nation. are given great importance by the press. Consequently the coverage
received by a candidate who does well in Iowa constitutes a tremendous amount of free publicity that can
help him or her in the New Hampshire primary election. Doing well in that primary results in even more
media attention. thus boosting the candidate for the
next primaries, and so on.
• Watchdog Once the scorekeepers decide that you
are the person to watch. they adopt their watchdog
role. When Gary Hart was the front-runner for the
1988 Democratic presidential nomination. the press
played its watchdog role right from the start. When
rumors circu lated that he was unfaithful to his wife.
the Miami Herald staked out his apartment in Washington, D.C .. and discovered that he had spent several
evening hours there with an attractive young woman,
Donna Rice. Soon there appeared other stories about
his having taken Ms. Rice on a boat trip to Bimini. Not
long thereafter Hart dropped out of the presidential
race, accusing the press of unfair tTeatment.
This close scrutiny is natural. The media have an
instinctive-and profitable-desire to investigate personalities and expose scandals. To some degree all
reporters probably share the belief that the role of the
press is to "comfort the afflicted and afflict the comJortable." They tend to be tolerant of underdogs. tough on
front-runners. Though some reporters develop close
relations with powerful personages. many--especially

younger ones-find the discovery of wrongdoing both
more absorbing and more lucrative. Bob Woodward
and Carl Bernstein, who wrote most of the Watergate
stories for the Washington Post, simultaneously performed an important public service. received the accolades of their colleagues. and earned a lot of money.
Newspapers and television stations play these
three roles in somewhat different ways. A newspaper
can cover more stories in greater depth than a TV
station and faces less competition from other papers
than TV stations face from other broadcasters. A TV
station faces brutal competition, must select its programs in part for their visual impact. and must keep
its stories short and punchy. As a result newspaper
reporters have more freedom to develop their own
stories. but they earn less money than television
news broadcasters. The latter have little freedom (the
fear of los ing their a udience is keen), but they can
make a lot of money (if they are attractive personalities who photograph well ).

*-

Rules Governing the Media

Ironically. the least competitive media outlets-the
big-city newspapers-are almost entirely free from
government regulation. while the most competitive
ones-radio and television stations-must have a
government license to operate and must adhere to a
variety of government regulations.
ewspapers and magazines need no license to
publish. their freedom to pub lish may not be
restrained in advance, and they are liabl e for punishment for what they do publish only under certain
highly restricted circumstances. The First Amendment to the Constituti on has been interpreted as
meaning that no government, federal or state, can
place "prior restraints" (that is. censorship) on the
press except under very narrowly defined circumstances. 9 When the federal government sought to
prevent the New York Times from publishing the Pentagon Papers, a set of secret government documents
sto len by an antiwar activist, the Court held that the
paper was free to publish them. IO
Once something is published , a newspaper or magazine may be sued or prosecuted if the material is
libelous or obscene or if it incites someone to commit
an illegal act. But these are usually not very serious
restrictions, because the courts have defined libelous.
obscene, and incitement so narrowly as to make it more
difficult here than in any other nation to find the

Rules Governing the Media
press guilty of such conduct. For example, for a paper
to be found gu ilty of libeling a public omcial or other
prominent person, the person must not only show
that what was printed was wrong and damaging
but must also show, with "clear and convincing evidence, " that it was printed maliciously- that is, with
"reckless disregard " for its truth or falsity,] 1 When in
1984 Israeli General Ariel Sharon sued Time magazi ne for libel, the ju ry decided that the story that Tirne
had printed was false and defamatory but that Time
had not published it as the result of malice, and so
Sharon did not collect any damages,
There are also laws intended to protect the privacy of citizens, but they do not really inhibit newspapers. In general, your name and picture can be
printed without your consent if they are part of a
news story of some conceivable public interest. And
if a paper attacks you in print, the paper has no legal
obligation to give you space for a reply.12
It is illegal to use printed words to advocate the
violent overthrow of the government if by your
advocacy you incite others to action, but this rule
has been applied to newspapers only rarely.] 3

Confidentiality of Sources
Reporters believe that they should have the right to
keep confid entia l the sources of their stories. Some
states agree and have passed laws to that effect. Most
states and the federal government do not agree, so the
courts must decide in each case whether the need of a
journalist to protect confidential sources does or does
not outweigh the interest of the government in gathering evidence in a criminal investigation. In genera l
the Supreme Court has upheld the right of the government to compel reporters to divulge information
as part of a properly conducted criminal investigation, if it bears on the commission of a crime. 14
This conf1ict arises not only between reporters
and law enforcement agencies but also between
reporters and persons accused of committing a
crime. Myron Farber, a reporter for the New York
Times, wrote a series of stories that led to the indictment and trial of a phYSician on charges that he had
murdered five patients. The judge ordered Farber to
show him his notes to determine whether they
shou ld be given to the defense lawyers. Farber
refused, arguing that revealing his notes would
infringe upon the confid entiality that he had promised to his sources. Farber was sent to jail for contempt of court. On appeal the New Jersey Supreme
Court and the U.S. Supreme Court decided against

Farber, holding that the accused person's right to a
fair trial includes the right to compel the production
of evidence, even from reporters.
In another case the Supreme Court upheld the
right of the police to search newspaper offices, so
long as they have a warrant. But Congress then
passed a law forbidding such searches (except in special cases), requiring instead that the police subpoena the desired documentsJ5

Regulating Broadcasting
Although newspapers and magazines by and large
are not regulated, broadcasting is regulated by the
government. No one may operate a radio or television station without a license from the Federal Communications Commission, renewable every seven
years for radio and every five for television stations.
An application for renewal is rarely refused, but until
recently the FCC required the broadcaster to submit
detailed information about its programming and
how it planned to serve "community needs" in order
to get a renewal. Based on this information or on the
complaints of some group, the FCC could use its powers of renewal to influence what the station put on
the air. For examp le, it could induce stations to
reduce the amount of vio lence shown, increase the
proportion of "public service" programs on the a ir,
or alter the way it portrayed various ethnic groups.
Of late a movement has arisen to deregulate
broadcasting, on the grounds that so many stations
are now on the air that competition sh ould be
allowed to determine how each station deflnes and
serves community needs. In this view citizens can
choose what they want to hear or see without the
government's shaping the content of each station's
programming. For example, since the early 1980s a
station can simply submit a postcard requesting that
its license be renewed, a request automatically granted unless some group formally opposes the renewal.
In that case the FCC hold s a hearing. As a result some
of the old rules- for instance, that each hour on TV
could contain on ly sixteen minutes of commercials- are no longer rigidly enforced.
Radio broadcasting has been deregulated the
most. Before 1992 one company could own one AM
and one FM station in each market. In 1992 this
number was doubled. And in 1996 the Telecommunications Act allowed one company to own as many
as eight stations in large markets (five in smaller
ones) and as many as it wished nationally. This trend
has had two results . First, a few large companies now

301

302

Chapter 12

The Media

LANDMARK CASES
The Rights of the Media
• Near v. Minnesota (1931): Freedom of the press applies to state governments, so that
they cannot impose prior restraint on newspapers.
• New York Times v. Sullivan (1964): Public officials may not win a libel suit unless they can
prove that the statement was made knowing it to be false or with reckless disregard of
its truth.
• Miami Herald v. Tornillo (1974): A newspaper cannot be required to give someone a right
to rep ly to one of its stories.

own most of the big-market radio stations. Second,
the looser editorial restrictions that accompanied
deregulation mean that a greater variety of opinions
and shows can be found on radio. There are many
more radio talk shows than would have been heard
when content was more tightly controlled.
Deregu lation has also lessened the extent to
which the federal government shapes the content of
broadcasting. At one time, for example. there was a
Fairness Doctrine that required broadcasters that air
one side of a story to give time to opposing points of
view. But there are now so many radio and television
stations that the FCC relies on competition to manage differences of opinion. The abandonment of the
Fairness Doctrine permitted the rise of controversial
talk radio shows. If the doctrine had stayed in place,
there would be no Rush Limbaugh. The FCC decided
that competition among news outlets protected people by giving them many different sources of news.
There still exists an e qual time rule that obliges
stations that sell advertising time to one political candidate to sell equal time to that person's opponents.

Campaigning
When candidates wish to campaign on radio or television, the equal time rule applies. A broadcaster must
provide equal access to candidates for office and charge
them rates no higher than the cheapest rate applicable
to commercial advertisers for comparable time.

An FCC rule that if a broadcast e r se lls time to o ne can d idate, it must se ll
eq ua l t im e t o oth er can d idates.

equal time rule

At one time this rule meant that a station or network could not broadcast a debate between the Democratic and Republican candidates for an office without
inviting all other candidates as well- Libertarian, Prohibitionist, or whatever. Thus a presidential debate in
1980 could be limited to the major candidates, Reagan
and Carter (or Reagan and Anderson), only by having
the League of Women Voters sponsor it and then
allowing radio and TV to cover it as a "news event."
Now stations and networks can themselves sponsor
debates limited to major candidates.
Though laws guarantee that candidates can buy
time at favorab le rates on television, not all candidates take advantage of this. The reason is that television is not always an efficient way to reach voters.
A television message is literally "broad cast"-spread
out to a mass audience without regard to the boundaries of the district in which a candidate is running.
Presidential candidates, of course, always use television, because their constituency is the whole nation.
Candidates for senator or representative. however,
mayor may not use television, depending on
whether the boundaries of their state or district conform well to the boundaries of a television market.
A market is an area easily reached by a television
signal; there are about two hundred such markets in
the country. If you are a member of Congress from
South Bend , Indiana , you come from a television market based there. You can buy ads on the TV stations in
South Bend at a reasonable fee. But if you are a member of Congress from northern New Jersey, the only
television stations are in nearby New York City. In that
market. the costs of a TV ad are very high because they
reach a lot of people, most of whom are not in your
district and so cannot vote for you. Buying a TV ad is a

Are the National Media Biased?

303

waste of money. As a result, a much higher percentage
of Senate than of House candidates use television ads.

*

Are the National Media
Biased?
Everyone believes that the media have a profou nd
effect, for better or for worse, on politics. Many think
that the political opin ions of writers and editors
influence that effect. To decide whether these statements are true, we must answer three questions:
1. Do members of the media have a distinctive political attitude?
2. Does that attitude affect what they write or say?
3. Does what they write or say affect what citizens
believe?
The answers to these questions, to be discussed
below, are yes, yes, and probably.
I. What are the views of members of the
national media? The great majority is libera l. There
have been many studies of this that date back to the
early 1980s, and they all come to the same conclusion: members of the national press are more liberal tha n the average citizen. Table 12.2 provides one
glimpse of this. but other studies confirm itJ6
In 1992. 91 percent of the media members who
were interviewed said that they had voted for the
Democratic candidate for president. By contrast, only
43 percent of the public voted that way.] 7
Not only are they more liberal, they tend to be
more secular. About 70 percent say they never or
only a few times a year attend a religious service. And
in recent years the surveys suggest that they have
become more liberal. For example, between 1980 and
1995 the proportion of media members who believe
that the government should guarantee jobs to people
rose. and the proportion who think that government
should reduce the regulation of business fell. I8
The public certa inly believes that members of the
media are liberals. A Gallup Poll done in 2003 found
that 45 percent of Americans believe that the media
are "too libera l" (15 percent thought they were "too
conservative"). In another study, even Democrats
agreed w ith this view.1 9
There are conservative media outlets, and they have
become more visible in recent years. Radio talk shows,
such as those managed by Rush Limbaugh and Sean
Hannity, are conservative, as is some of the reporting

Spanish-speaking voters have become so important that candidates
(such as George W Bush here) run Spanish-language web sites.

broadcast on Fox News television, such as the "O'Reilly
Factor." Limbaugh and Hannity have large audiences,
and Fox News has grown in popularity.
One-fifth of all Americans listen to radio ta lk
shows every day and another tenth listen severa l
times a week. A puzzling fact is that ta lk radio, which

.

••

Journalists
Self-described ideology:
Liberal
Conservative
Favor government
regulation of business
U.S. should withdraw investments from South Africa
Allow women to have
abortions
Allow prayer in public
schools
Favor "affirmative action"
Favor death penalty for
murder
Want stricter controls on
handguns
Increase defense budget
Favor hiring homosexuals

.
The Public

55%
17
49

23%
29
22

62

31

82

49

25

74

81
47

56
75

78

50

15
89

38
55

Sources: Los Angeles Times poll of about 3.000 citizens and
2, 700 jou rnalists nationw ide, as reported in Wi lliam Schneider
and I. A. Lew is, "Views on t he News," Public Opinion (Augu st!
September 1985): 7. Reprinted w ith permission of American
Enterprise Inst itute for Public Pol icy Research.

304

Chapter 12

The Media

How to Read a Newspaper
Newspapers don't simply report the news; they
report somebody's idea of what is news, written in
language intended to persuade as well as inrorm.
To read a newspaper intelligently, look for three
things: what is covered, who are the sources, and
how language is used.
Coverage

Every newspaper wi ll cover a big story, such as a
flood, fire, or presidential trip, but newspapers can
pick and choose among lesser stories. One paper
will select stories abou t the environment, business
rraud, and civil rights; another will prefer stories
about crime, drug dealers, and "welfare cheats."
What do these choices tell you about the beliefs of
the editors and reporters working for these two
papers? What do these people want you to believe
are the important issues?
Sources

For some stories, the source is obv ious: "The
Supreme Court decided .. . ," "Congress voted . .. ,"
or "The president sa id .... "For others, the source
is not so obvious. There are two kinds of sources
you should beware or. The !lrst is an anonymous
source. When you read phrases such as "a high
offlcial said today ... " or "White House sources
revea led that . . . " always ask yourselr this question: Why does the source want me to know this?
The answer usually wiJI be this: because if I believe
what he or she said, it will advance his or her interests. This can happen in one of three ways. First,
the source may support a policy or appointment
and want to test public reaction to it. This is called
flo ating a trial balloon. Second, the source may
oppose a policy or appointment and hope that by
leaking word of it, the idea will be killed. Third, the
source may want to take credit for something good
that happened or shift blame onto somebody else
for something bad that happened. When you read
a story that is based on anonymous sources, ask

has grown rapidly in importance, should be predominately conservative. Almost hair or the twentyeight largest talk shows were hosted by outspoken
conservatives.

yourself these questions: Judging from the tone of
the story, is th is leak designed to support or kill
an idea ? Is it designed to take cred it or shift blame?
In whose interest is it to accomp li sh these things?
By asking these questions , you often can make a
pretty good guess as to the identity of the anonymous source.
Some stories depend on the reader's believing a
key fact, previously unknown. For example: "The
world's climate is getting hotter because or manmade pollution," "drug abuse is soaring," "the death
penalty will prevent murder, " "husbands are more
liIcely to beat up on their wives on Super Bowl Sunday." Each of these "facts" is either wrong, grossly
exaggerated, or stated with excessive confidence.
But each comes from an advocate organization that
wants you to believe it, because if you do, you will
take that organization's solution more seriously. Be
skeptical of key facts if they come from an advocacy
source. Don't be misled by the tendency or many
advocacy organizations to take neutTal or scholarly
names like "Center for the Public Interest" or "Institute for Poli cy Research. " Some of these real ly are
neutral or scholarly, but many aren't.
Language

Everybody uses words to persuade people of something without actually making a clear argument
for it. This is called using loade d language. For
example: if you like a politician, call him "Senator
Smith"; if you don't like him, refer to him as "rightwing (or left-wing) senators such as Smith." If you
like an idea proposed by a professor, call her
"respected"; if you don't like the idea, call her
"controversial. " If you favor abortion, call somebody who agrees with yo u "pro-choice" ("choice"
is valued by most people); if you oppose abortion,
call those who agree with you "pro-life" (" life," like
"choice," is a good thing). Recognizing loaded language in a newspaper article can give you important clues to the writer's own pOint of view.

None of th is dominance is the resu lt of rad io station owners plotting to put conservatives on the air.
Media owners are interested in ratings- that is, in
measures of how big their audiences are. Libera l ta lk

Are the Natiol1al Media Biased?
show hosts have had big corporate sponsors, but
they dropped away when the show did not get good
ratings. If Fidel Castro got high ratin gs by pl ayin g the
harmonica, Castro would be on the air.
William G. Mayer, a political scientist, has speculated as to why conservative talk shows are so
common. First, there are more self-described conservatives than liberals in this country. Second, conservative
listeners do not think their views are reflected in what
big-city newspapers, the major television networks,
and the leading news magazines display. Liberals, by
contrast, thinlc their views are encouraged by newspapers and television stations. Third, much of the liberal
audience is broken up into distinctive racial and ethnic
groups that have their own radio outlets. Many Hispanics listen to stations that broadcast in Spanish;
many African Americans prefer stations that have
black hosts and focus on black community issues. 20
2. Do th e beliefs of th e national media affect
how they report th e n ews? That is a harder question to answer. In the United States, the journalistic
ph ilosophy in many media docu ments is that the
press, when it reports the news (though not in editorial pages), should be neutral and objective. That
view, of course, does not cover radio talk shows. but it
is supposed to cover newspapers. A different view ca n
be found in France or Great Britain where newspapers
often clearly identify with one party or a nother.
But it is hard to measure whether the Ameri can
commitment to objectivity is actua lly ach ieved. One
would have to take into account not on ly how much
space a politician or policy receives, but the tone in
which it is handled a nd the adjectives used to
describe people who are part of those stories.
New stories differ significa ntly in the opportunity
for bias. Routine stories cover major political events
that will be covered by many reporters and that
involve relatively simple matters. For example: the
president takes a trip, the Congress passes a major bill ,
or the Supreme Court issues a ruling. Feature stories
cover events that, though public, a reporter has to seek
out because they are not routinely covered by the
press. The reporter has to fmd the story a nd persuade
an editor to publish it. For example: an interest group
works hard to get a bill passed, a government agency
adopts a new ruling, or a member of Congress conducts an unusual investigation. Insider stories cover
things that are often secret. Investigative reporters are
often credited with uncovering these stories, though it
is often the case that some government insider leaked
the story to the press. Which leak a reporter picks up

on may be influenced by the reporter's view as to what
is important to him or her.
Routine stories are often covered in much the
same way by reporters. The space given to the story
a nd the head line attached to it may refl ect the po litical views of the editor, but the story itself is often
written about the same way by every reporter. Feature and insider stories , by contrast, may more easily
reflect the political views of reporters and editors. On
these stories, journalists have to make choices.
Early in American history, newspapers had virtually no routine stories; almost everything they printed
was an expression of opinion. By the twentieth century, with the advent of telephone and telegraph lines
that made it easy for news organizations such as the
Associated Press to send the sa me story to almost every
newspaper, routine stories beca me commonplace. But
with the advent of radio and television and the rise of
around-the-clock news broadcasting, feature and
insider stories became much more important to newspapers. If people got their routine news from radio and
television. newspapers had to sell something different;
what was different were feature and insider stories.
A conservative newspaper might print feature or
insider stories about crime, drug abuse. or welfare
cheats. while a liberal newspaper might run ones on
feminism. the environment, or civil rights. There are,
however. very few conservative newspa pers with a
national audience.
A key question is whether there are fa cts to back up
these generalizations. There are no definitive answers;
here we can take a look at a few of the better studies.
One looked at twelve years. worth of po litica l stories published in the Ne w York Times and the Washington Post. It asked how these papers described the
ten most libera l and the ten most conservative senators. The authors found that conservative senators

trial balloon

Informat ion leaked to the media
to test publi c reaction to a possible policy.
loa ded language Words that imply a value
judgment, used to persuade a reader w ithout
having mad e a ser ious argument.
routine stories Media stories about events
that are regularly covered by reporters.
fea t ure stories Media sto ri es about events
th at, though public, are not regularly covered
by repo rt ers.
insider sto r ies Media st o ri es about events
t hat are not usual ly made publ ic.

30 5

30 6

Chapter 12

The Media

were about three times more likely to be ca ll ed conservative than libera l senators were to be ca lled liberal. 21 The difference in the use of adj ectives may
influence how readers feel about the story. Politically
independent readers might (no one knows) take
more seriously the views of senators that are given
no ideo logical labels than they will of those to which
such labels have been attached.
There have been efforts to see how newspapers
and magazines cover specific issues. When Tim e and
Ne wsweek ran stories about nuclear power. scholars
found they tended to avoid quoting scienti sts a nd
engineers working in this fi eld because these specialists were in favor of nuclear power at a time when the
magazines were opposed to it. 22
Another study looked at how the top ten newspapers a nd the Associated Press cover economic news
when there is either a Democratic or Republican
president in olTice. The news wa s based on government reports about sa les. unemployment, and economic growth over a thirteen-year period. The
authors decided whether a newspa per's headline
covering that news (on the day it was released) was
either positive, negative. or neutral. In genera l. these
head lines gave a more positive spin when th ere was a
Democrat in the White House and a more nega tive
one when there was a Republica n there. n
But perhaps the easiest evidence to understand
co mes from reporters themselves. The New Yo rk
Tim es has a "public editor," that is. a perso n charged
with receiving co mplaints from the public. When
asked. "Is the New York Tim es a libera l news paper?"
he answered, in print, very simply: "Of co urse it is."
On "gay rights. gun control , abortion, and environmenta l regulation. among others" the Times does not
play it "down the middl e.'·24
Public distru st of the medi a has grown. As can be
see in Figure 12.2. the proportion of people saying
that news stories are often inaccurate ha s grown significantly since 1985.
3. Does w h at th e m edia w rite or say influence how th eir read ers and viewers thin k? This
is the hardest question to answer. Some people will be
influenced by what they read or hear, but others wi ll
not be. There is a well-known psychological process

selective attention Payi ng atte nt ion o n ly to
th ose news stor ies w ith wh ich one a lrea d y
agrees.

called selective attention. It mea ns that people
remember or believe only what they want to. If they
see or hear statements that are inconsistent with th eir
existing beliefs. they wil l tune out these message.2)
To identify who, if anyone, is influenced by what
the press says or broadcasts, one would have to study
how people think about po litica l ca ndidates and publi c poli cy issues in ways that take into account what
they read or hea r. That is very hard to do. There have
been so me efforts along these lines. however.
After the 19 ()4 presidential election. one study
suggested that in the northern part of the United
States a newspaper endorsement favoring Democratic ca ndidate Lyndon Jo hn so n added about five percentage points to the vote he received. 26
Another study exa mined the vote in more than sixty
contests for the U.S. Senate held over a five-year period.
Newspaper stories about the rival candidates were
scored as positive. negative. or neutral. How voters felt
about the ca ndidates were learned from public opinion
polis. Obviously. many things other than newspaper
stories will affect how voters feel, and so the authors of
this study tried to control for these factors. They held
constant the seniority of incumbent candidates. th e
level of politica l experience of challengers. the amount
of campaign spending, how close each race was, and
the political ideology and party identiftcation of voters.
After doing all of this, they discovered two things. First.
newspapers that endorsed incumbents on their editoria l pages gave more positive news coverage to them than
did newspapers that did not endorse them. Second. the
voters had more positi ve feelings about endorsed
incumbents th an they did about nonendorsed ones. In
short. editorial views a ffect news coverage. and news
coverage affects public attitudes. 27
What the press covers a ffects the policy issues that
people think are importa nt. Experiments conducted
in ew Haven . Con necticut. a nd a study done in
North Carolina show that what citizens believe about
some po licy questions reflects what newspapers and
telev ision stations say about them. 2il
But there are limits to media influence. If people are
unemployed. the victims of crime. or worried about
high gasoline prices, they do not have to be to ld these
things by the media.29 They learn them by themselves.
But most people have no persona l knowl edge of hi ghway fatalities. the condition of the environment. or
American foreign policy in Europe. On these matters.
the media are likely to have much more influence.
But the best evidence of how important the media
are comes from the behavior of people trying to get

GovernmCl1t and the News
Figure 12.2
-

307

Public Perception of Accuracy in the Media

News stories are often inacc urate

70

60

ill, 50
2c
<ll

~

~

40

30

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

Source: Pew Resea rch Center, "The People and t he Press" (February

1999),1 3.

Governillent and the News
W Mark Felt, once the second in comlllalld at the FB I. was

the ';Oeep Throat" who leaked information to the Washington Post about President Nixon's involvemellt ill the
Watergate scalldal.
elected , In 1950 Estes Kefauver was a littl e-known
senator from Tennessee. Then he chaired a Senate
committee in vestigating organ ized crime. When
these dramatic hearings were televised, Kefauver
became a household na me. In 1952 he ran for the
Democratic nomination for president and won a lot
of primary votes befo re losing to Adlai Stevenson.
From that time on, developing a strong media presence beca me a top priority for political candidates.
Sometimes it backfires. In 2004 Howard Dean, then a
candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination. saw his campaign start to sputter after television
carried a speech he gave to his suppor ters that seemed
to end in a kind of anguished scream. And every
White House staffer spends a lot of time worrying
about how to get the press, especially telev ision. to
cover the president. Studies show that telev ision commentary about presidents affects their popu larity.30
President Lyndon Johnson reportedly concluded that
the war he was supporting in Vietnam was a hopeless
ca use after Walter Cronkite, then the star of the popular CBS News program, turned against the war.

Every government agency, every public omcial. spends
a great deal of time trying to shape public opinion.
From time to time somebody publishes an expose of
the efforts of the Pentagon, th e White House. or some
bureau to usell" itself to the people, but in a government of separated powers, weak parties, and a decentralized legislature, any government agency that fails
to cultivate public opinion will sooner or later find
itself weak without allies. and in troub le.

Prominence of the President
Theodore Roosevelt was the first president to raise the
systematic cultivation of the press to an art form.
From the day he took omce, he made it clear that he
would give inside stories to friendly reporters and
withhold them [rom hostile ones. He made sure that
scarcely a day passed without his doing something
newsworthy. In 1902 he built the West Wing of the
White House and included in it, for the f'irst time, a
special room for reporters near his office, a nd he invited the press to become fascinated by the antics of his
chil dren. In return the reporters adored him. Teddy's
nephew Franklin Roosevelt institutiona li zed this
system by making his press secretary (a job created by
Herbert Hoover) a major instrument for cultivating
and managing, as well as informing. the press. 3J

1998

308

Chapter 12

The "Rules"

The Media

Coverage of Congress

of Politics

The Maxims of Media Relations
The importance of the national media to politicians
has given rise to some shared understandings
among officeholders about how one deals with the
media . Some of these are caught in the following
maxims:
• All secrets become public knowledge . The more
important the secret, the sooner it becomes
known .
• All stories written about me are inaccurate; all
stories written about you are entirely accurate.
• The rosier the news, the higher ranking the official who announces it.
• Always release bad news on Saturday night.
Fewer people notice it.
• Never argue with a person who buys ink by the
barrel.

Today the press secretary heads a large staff that
meets with reporters, briefs the president on questions he is likely to be asked , attempts to contro l the
flow of news from cabinet departments to the press,
and arranges briefings for out-of-town ed itors (to
bypass what many presidents think are the biases of
the White House press corps).
All this effort is directed primarily at the White
House press corps, a group of men and women who
have a lounge in the Wh ite House itself where they
wait for a story to break, attend the daily press briefing, or take advantage of a "photo op"- an opportunity to photograph the president with some
newsworthy person.
No other nation in the world has brought the
press into such close physical proximity to the head
of its government. The result is that the actions of
our government are personalized to a degree not
found in most other democracies. Whether the president rides a horse, comes down with a cold, greets a
Boy Scout, or takes a trip in his airplane. the press is
there. The prime minister of Great Britain does not
share his home with the press or expect to have his
every sneeze recorded for posterity.

Congress has watched all this with irritation and envy.
It resents the attention given the president, but it is not

certain how it can compete. The 435 members of the
House are so numerous and play such specialized roles
that they do not get much individualized press attention. In the past the House was quite restrictive about
telev ision or radio coverage of its proceedings. Until
1978 it prohibited television cameras on the floor
except on purely ceremonial occasions (such as the
annua l State of the Union message delivered by the
president). From 1952 to 1970 the House would not
even a llow electronic coverage of its committee hearings (except for a few occasions during those periods
when the Republicans were in the majority). Significant live coverage of committee hearings began in
1974 when the House Judiciary Committee was discussing the possible impeachment of President
ixon. 31 Since 1979 cable TV (C-SPAN) has provided
gavel-to-gavel coverage of speeches on the House floor.
The Senate has used televis ion much more fully,
heightening the already substantial advantage that
senators have over representatives in getting the public eye. Although radio and television coverage of the
Senate noor was not allowed until 1978 (when the
debates on the Panama Cana l treaties were broadcast
live) , Senate committee hearings have frequently
been telev ised for either news films or live broadcasts
ever since Estes Kefauver demonstrated the power of
this medium in 1950. Since 1986 the Senate has
a llowed li ve C-SPAN coverage of its sessions.
Senatorial use of televised committee hearings has
helped turn the Senate into the incubator for presidential candidates. At least in most states, if you are a governor, you are located far from network television
news cameras: the best you can hope for is that some
disaster-a flood or a blizzard- will bring the cameras
to you and focus them on your leadership. But senators all work in Washington, a city fllled with cameras.
No disaster is necessary to get on the air; only an investigation. a scandal, a major political conflict, or an
articu late and telegenic personality is needed.

Why Do

m Have So Many News Leaks?

American government is the leakiest in the world.
The bureaucracy, members of Congress, and the
White House staff regularly leak stories favorable to
their interests. Of late the leaks have become geysers.
gushing forth torrents of insider stories. Many people
in and out of government find it depressing that our

Government ami the Ne ws
government seems unable to keep a nything secret for
long. Others think that the public has a right to know
even more a nd that there are sti ll too many secrets.
However you view leaks, you should u nderstand
why we have so many. The a nswer is found in the
Constitution. Because we have sepa rate institutions
that must share power, each bra nch of government
competes with the others to get power. One way to
compete is to try to use the press to advan ce your pet
projects and to make the other side look bad. There
are fa r fewer leaks in other democratic nations in
part beca use power is centralized in the ha nds of a
prime minister, who does not need to lea k in order to
get the upper h and over the legislature, and because
the legislature has too little informati on to be a good
so urce of lea ks. In addition we have no Official
Secrets Act of the kind that ex ists in Engla nd; except
for a few matters, it is not aga in st the law for the
press to rece ive a nd print governm ent secrets.
Even if the press and th e poli ticians loved each
other, the competition between the various branches
of government would guarantee plenty of news leaks.
But since the Vietnam War. the Watergate scandal,
and the Ira n-contra affair. the press and the politicians have come to distrust one a nother. As a result,
journ alists today are fa r less willing to accept at face
va lue th e statements of elected officials and are far
more li kely to try to find somebody who wi ll leak "the
rea l story." We have come, in short, to have an adve rsariaI press- that is, one that (at least at the nationallevcl ) is suspicious of offi cialdom a nd eager to break
a n embarrassing story that will win for its a uthor
honor, prestige, and (in some cases) a lot of money.
This cynicism and distrust of government and
elected officials have led to a n era of attack journalism- seizing upon a ny bit of inform ation or rumor
that mi ght ca ll into question the qualifications or
character of a public official. Medi a coverage of
ga ffes- misspoken words, missta ted ideas, clumsy
moves- has become a staple of political journalism.
At one time, such "events" as President Ford slipping
down so me stairs. Govern or Duka kis dropping the
ball whil e playing catch with a Boston Red Sox player,
or Vice President Quayle misspelli ng the word potato
would have been ignored, but now they are hot news
items. Attacking public figures has become a professiona l norm, where once it was a professional taboo.
During the 1992 election, most of the nationa l
press clearly supported Bill Clinton. The love affair
betwee n Clinton and reporters lasted for several
months after his ina uguration. But when stories

When President Theodore Roosevelt cultivated the media,
reporters were usually unknown and poorly paid.

began to appea r about Whitewater (a n Arkansas real
estate deal in which the Clintons were once involved),
Clinton's alleged sexual escapades, a nd Hillary Rodham Clin ton's profits in commodities trading, th e
press went into a feeding frenzy. The Cli ntons learned
the ha rd way the truth of an old adage: if you want a
friend in Washington , buy a dog.
Many people do not like this type of journalism,
and the media's rising cyn icism about the government is mir rored by the public's increasing cy nicism
about the medi a. In a national survey of registered
voters conducted shortly before the 2000 preS idential
election, 89 percen t of respondents agreed that the
media's "political views influence coverage" often (57
percent) or sometimes (32 perce nt); 47 percent
believed that "most journa lists" were "pullin g for "
Gore to win ; and 23 percent believed that most journalists were partial to Bush .33 Most Americans really
dislike bi ased journalism (or journalism they perceive
as biased): 53 percent say they would require a license
to practice journalism, and 70 percent favor courtimposed fines for inaccurate or biased reporting.34
Furthermore. the public's con lldence in big business has eroded along with its co nfidence in government, and the medi a are increas in gly big business. As

adversarial press The tendency of the national
media to be suspicious of officials and eager to
reveal unflattering stories about them.

309

310

Chapter 12

The Media

In 1933 White House press conferences were informal affairs. as when reporters gathered
around Franklin Roosevelt's desk in the Oval Office. Today theU are huge gatherings held in a
special conference room, as 011 the right.

noted earlier in this chapter. network television has
become a highly competitive industry. Under these
circumstances, every contribution to "market share"
is vita lly important. and the newsroom is no exception. In a highly competitive environment that is rich
in information, those who aspLre to reach a mass market must find a mass theme into which they can tap
with visually dramatic. quick-tempo messages. In politics the theme is obvious: politics is a cor rupt.
self-serving enterprise. Many people includ e the
profit-driven press in their antipolitical sentiments.
Given their experiences with Watergate and Irangate. given the highly competitive nature of national
newsgathering. and given their political ideology
(which tends to put them to the left of the administration in power). American editors and reporters. at
least at the national level, are likely to have an adversarial relationship with government for a long time to
come. Given our constitutional system. there will
always be plenty of people in government eager to help
them with leaks hostile to one faction or another.
One side effect of the increaSingly adversarial
nature of the press is the increased prevalence of
negative campaign advertising- that is. of ads that
lambaste opponents and attack them on a personal
level. Adversarial media coverage has helped ma ke
these types of ads more socially acceptable. The reason ca ndidates use attack ads is simple: they work. A
good negative ad will change the preferences of some
voters. But this change is purchased at a price.

Research shows that a nega tive ad not only changes
voter preferences. it reduces voter turnout. Negative
advertising may help a ca ndidate win. but only by
turning other people against elections.

Sensationalism in the Media
Back in the 1930s newspaper reporters knew that
President Franklin Roosevelt had a romantic affair
with a woman other than his wife. They did not report
it. In the early 19 60s many reporters knew that President John Kennedy had many sexual affairs outside
his marriage. They did not report this. In 1964 the
director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation played
for reporters secret tape recordings of the Reverend
Martin Luther King. Jr.. having sex with women other
than his wife. They did not report it.
By the 1980s sex and politics were extenSively
covered. When presidential candidate Gary Hart was
caught in adultery and when President Bill Clinton
was accused of adultery by Gennifer Flowers. of asking for sexual favors by Paula Jones. and of having
sex with Monica Lewinsky in the Oval Office. these
were headline news stories.
What had changed ? ot politics: all of the people
whom the press protected or reported on were
Democra ts. The big change was in the economics of
journalism a nd the ideas of reporters.
Until the 1970s Americans gathered their political news from one of three networks- ABC. CBS. or
NBC. For a long time these networks had only one

Government and the News
half-hour news show a day. Today, however, viewers
have the same three networks plus three cable news
networks, two sports networks. ten weekly newsmagazine shows, countless radio talk shows, and the
Tnternet. Many of the cable networks, such as CNN.
carry news 24 hours a day. The result of this intense
competition is that each radio or television network
has a small share of the audience. Today less than
half the public watches the evening network news
shows. Dozens of news programs are trying to reach
a shrinking audience, with the result that the audience share of each program is small . To attract any
audience at all, each program has a big incentive to
rely on sensational news stories- sex. vio lence, and
intrigue. Reinforcing this desire to go with sensationalism is the fact that covering such stories is cheaper
than investigating foreign policy or ana lyzing the tax
code. During its first month. the Lewinsky story consumed more than one-third of the on-air time of the
news networks- more than the U.S. showdown with
Tran. the Winter Olympics, the pope's visit to Cuba .
and the EI Nino weather pattern combined.
Since the days of Vietnam and Watergate. journalists have become adversaries of the government.
They instinctively distrust people in government. But
to that attitude change can be added an economic
one: in the ir desperate effort to reclaim market share,
journalists are much more lU<ely to rely on unnamed
sources than once was the case. When the Washington Post broke the Watergate story in the 1970s, it
required the reporters to have at least two sources for
tbeir stories. Now many reporters break stories that
have on ly one unnamed source, and often not a
source at all but a rumor posted on the Internet.
As a result, reporters are more easi ly manipulated
by sources tha n once was the case. Spokesmen for
President Clinton tried to "spin" the news about his
affa irs. usua lly by attacking his critics. Gennifer
Flowers. Pau la Jones, and Monica Lewinsky were
portrayed as bimbos, liars, or stalkers. Much of the
press used the spin. To see how successful spin can
be. compare independent counsel Lawrence Walsh's
investigation of aides to President Ronald Reagan
over the sa le of arms to Iran with independent counsel Kenneth Starr 's investigation of the Clinton
adm inistration. Walsh's inquiry got full press support. while Starr was regularly attacked by the press.
Since the terrorist attack on the United States on
September 11, 2001, there has been scattered evidence
to su ggest that sensationa lism in the media has
declined a bit, while public interest in national news

"Those art the headlines, and we'll be back ;/1 a moment
to blow them Ollt ifproportion. "

and trust of news organizations have increased somewhat. The big stories of the preceding years were the
sexual conduct of President Clinton and the connection between California representative Gary Condit and
a missing young woman. After September II, the press
focused on a more important matter----Defeating terrorism at home and abroad. By early 2002. surveys indicated that the number of people who said they followed
national news closely had increased slightly (rom 48
percent to 53 percent; the number who said the media
usually get the facts straigbt rose from 35 percent to 46
percent (the best public grade for accuracy in a decade):
and the number who rated the media's coverage of the
war on terrorism as good or excellent never fell below
three-quarters. 35 But the television networks do not
seem to be gaining any viewers back as a result of the
crisis: fully 53 percent cited cable as their primary
source for news on terrorism, versus 18 percent for
local television and 17 percent for national networks. 36

Government Constraints on]ourna/ists
An important factor works against the influence of
ideology and antiofficial attitudes on reporters-the
need every reporter has for access to key officials. A
reporter is on ly as good as his or her sources, and it is
difficult to cultivate good sources if you regularly
antagonize them. Thus Washington reporters mu st
constantly strike a balance between expressing their
own views (and risk losing a valuable source) and
keeping a source (and risk becoming its mouthpiece).
The great increase in the number of congression al
staff members has made striking this balance easier
than it once was. Since it is almost impossible to keep
anything secret from Congress. the existence of ftfteen
thousand to twenty thousand congressiona l staffers

311

Tensions Mount Between
U.S. and Ruritania
u.s. 6th Fleet. Maneuvenng
.
near
Afncan Nation

February 23
WASHfNGTON

MEMORANDUM

The State Department tod
.
clawlS that the United Stat a~ denIed Ruritanian
actlOIl against Rurita . . es IS plannlllg military
nla III the w k
.
SPOil ored terrorist actions.
a e of Runtanian_

To: Editor in chief, Washington Post
From: Foreign news editor
Subject: Ruritania
One of our best reporters has information that the United States plans
to invade Ruritania three days from now. His source is a top military official who has
been reliable in the past. As of now we do not think that any other newspaper has this
story. As you know, opinion in the government is deeply divided over the wisdom of
any action against Ruritania. So far all official sources in the White House and the
State Department have denied that anything is afoot. But we all know that the
president is deeply upset by the continuation of Ruritanian-sponsored terrorism against
U.S. personnel overseas. Your options are :
1. Print the story in tomorrow's ed ition .
Advantages: (a) This is important news, and we have an obligation to publish news.
(b) We get a major scoop that no other newspaper can match. (c) In our editorials we
have said that we think an invasion of Ruritania would be a mistake. This story, if
printed now, may lead to a cancellation of the military action .
Disadvantages: (a) There is a small chance that we could be wrong and no invasion is
planned. (b) We will be criticized for leaking military secrets. (c) If the invasion takes
place despite our story, the United States may lose the element of surprise, and this
may affect the outcome and cause additional casua lties.
2. Do not print the story.
Advantages: (a) We avoid charges that we are leaking military secrets. (b) If an
invasion occurs, we will not have alerted the enemy.
Disadvantages: (a) There is the possibility that another newspaper may learn of this
story in the next two days; if we don't publish now, they may publish later and we will
look foolish . (b) We will be failing in our duty to inform the people about the activities
of their government. (c) The Ruritanians may already know of the planned invasion,
and so our story will not have alerted them.
Your decision:
Option 1 _ __
Option 2 _ _ _

Summary

means that there is a potential source for every conceivable issue and cause. Congress has become a gold
mine for reporters. If a story annoys one congressional source, another source can easily be found.
The government is not without means to fight
back. The number of press officers on the payroll of
the White House, Congress, and the executive agencies has grown sharply in recent decades. Obviously
these people have a stake in putting out news stories
that reflect favorably on their elected superiors. They
can try to do this with press releases, but adversarial journa lists are susp icious of "canned news"
(although they use it nonetheless). Or the press officers
can try to win journalistic friends by offering leaks and
supplying background stories to favored reporters.
There are four ways in which reporters and public
officia ls, or their press ofTi cers. can communicate:
• On the record: The reporter can quote the official
by name.
• Off the record: What the official says cannot be
used.
• On background: What the official says can be
used but may not be attributed to him or her by
name. Reporters often call these anonymous
source "a high-ranking official" or "a knowledgeable member of Congress."
• On deep background: What the off'i cia l says can
be used but not attributed to anybody, even an
anonymous source.

*
C

To get around the national press, public officials
and their press officers can try to reach the loca l
media directly by giving interviews or appearing on
radio talk shows. The local media are a bit less likely
than the national media to have an adversarial attitude toward the national government, and one can
select talk-show hosts on the basis of their known
ideology.
The ultimate weapon in the government's effort to
shape the press to its liking is the president's rewarding of reporters and editors who treat him well and
his punishing of those who treat him badly. President
Kennedy regularly ca ll ed in offend ing reporters
for brutal tongue-lashings and favored friendly
reporters with tips and inside stories. Johnson did the
same, with special attention to television reporters.
Nixon made the mistake of attacking the press publicly, thereby allowing it to defend itself with appeals
to the First Amendment. (Kennedy's and Johnson's
manipulative skills were used privately.) Probably
every president tries to use the press with whatever
means are at his disposal. but in the long run it is the
press, not the president. who wins. Johnson decided
not to run aga in in 1968 in part because of press
hosti lity to him; Nixon was exposed by the press:
Carter and Bush came to be disliked by national
reporters. The press and the president need but
do not trust one another; it is inevitably a stormy
relationship.

SUMMARY

hanges in the nature of American politics have
been accompan ied by- and influenced bychanges in the nature of the mass media. The rise of
strong national political party organizations was facilitated by the emergence of mass-circulation daily newspapers. Political reform movements depended in part
on the development of national magazines catering to
middle-class opinion. The weakening of political parties was accelerated by the ability of candidates to
speak directly to constituents by radio and television.
The role of journalists in a democratic society
poses an inevitable dilemma: if they are to serve well
their functions as information gatherer. gatekeeper,
scorekeeper, and watchdog, they must be free of government controls. But to the extent that they are free
of such controls, they are also free to act in their own

interests, whether political or economic. In the United States a competitive press largely free of government contro ls (except in the area of broadcast
licenses) has produced both a substantial diversity of
opinion and a general (though not unanimous) commitment to the goal of fairness in news reporting.
The national media are in general more liberal than
the local media, but the extent to wh ich a reporter's
beliefs affect reporting varies greatly with the kind of
story-routine, feature, or insider.

background

A public official's statement to a
reporter that is given on condition that the
official not be named .

313

314

Chapter 12

The Media

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?

1. How much power do the media have?
A lot, but it is limited by selective attenLion and personal knowledge. Selective attention mea ns that people tend to believe only those arguments that are
consistent with their own beliefs. Persona l knowledge
means that people know a lot based on their own experiences regardless of what the press says. Politicians in
and out of ortke spend a great deal of time cultiva tin g
the media , but in many campaigns it is clear that the
press is more IU<ely to favor some people than others.

2. Can we trust the Inedia to (lej'air?
The public does not believe that we ca n trust the
press , and that hostility has increased in recent
years. Members of the national media are disproportionately liberal and secular, and there is so me ev idence that these liberal views affect what they say or
write. The extent of that political influence will differ,
however, depending on whether a story is a routine,
feature. or insider account.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. What puiJlic policies will the media support?
The media wi ll lead the public to think about issues
that are remote from their personal experiences,
such as foreign policy. But the press ca n take up or
drop issues. not beca use the issue ha s changed, but
because the issue has become, to journ alists. sta le.

Crime a nd dru g abuse may be big topics some years
and minor ones in other years. Liberal newspapers,
such as the New York Tim es. will be much more
interested in gay rights. gun control. and the environment than wi ll conservative newspapers or even
than the public genera lly.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

To search many newspapers: www.ipl.org
To get a nalyses of the press
Nonpartisan view: www.cmpa.org
A liberal view: www.fair.org
A conservative view: www.mrc.org
Public opinion about the press
Pew Research Center: people-press.org

rational media:
New York Times: www.nytimes.com
Wall Street Journal: www.wsj.com
Washington Post: www.washingtonpost.com

SUGGESTED READINGS
Cro Ll se. Timothy. Til e 130.'lS all ti,e 13115. ew York : Random HO Ll se.
19 73 . A li vely. irreverent a ccount by a participant o f how
re port ers cover a pres identia l campai gn.
Epstein . Edwa rd J. Betweell F(lct !lIId Fictioll : Ti, e Problelll of JOLlmllliSlll. New York : Rando m I-lo use. 1975. Essays by a percepti ve
student of the press on media coverage of Watergate. th e Penta gon Papers. th e dea th s o f Black Panth ers. and oth er m ajor
stori es.
- -- . NelVs f rolll Nowhere. New Yo rk : Random Hou se. 197 3.
Analysis of how television network news program s are produ ced an d shaped.
Garment. Su~an n e. Scalldal. New YO I' k: Random Hou se. 1991. A
careful look at the role o f th e med ia (and oth ers) in fosterin g
th e "culture of mistru st."
Graber. Doris A. Mllss Media alld AllleriCIIIl Politics. 6th cd. Wa s hington . D.C.: Con gressional Quarterly Press. 200 2 . A good
summ ary of what we kn ow about th e press a nd politi cs.
Iyen ga r. Shanto. and Donald R. Kinder. News That Matters. Chica go: University of Chi cago Press. ] 987. The report of ex peri ments tes lin g the e ffect of tel e vi s ion ne ws on publi c
perception s of po litics.

Kurl~.

Howard. Spill Cycle: /ll side tile C/ill tOll Propagnln/a Ma~l!ill e.
ew York: Free Press. 199R. A journa listic account of how on e
presid ent's staff tried to inllu c nce th e media.
Lichter. S. Hobert. Stanley Rothman. and Lind a S. Lichter. Ti, e
Media Wite. Bethesda. Md.: Ad ler a nd Adler. 1986. A study of
th e po li tical bel iefs of "elite" journalists an d how those beliefs
influ e nce what we rcad a nd hear.
McGowan. Wi lli am. C% rillg IIl e NelVs. Sa n Fran cisco: Enco unter
Books. 2 0 01. An arg ume nt abo ut th e harmful effects of amrm a ti ve a ction and "identity politics" o n news coverage.
Robinson. Michael J.. and Margaret A. Shee han . Ova tile Wire alld
all TV . New York: Russel l Sage Fo undati on. 198 3. Ana lyzes
h ow CBS News a nd United Press In ternational covered th e
19RO election.
Sabato. Larry J. Feedillg I'rellZ!I. New Yo rk: Free Press. 19 9 I .
Explai ns the press focu s on politica l mi scondu ct.

But the great security against a gradual
concentration of the several powers in the
same depart ent consists in giving to
those who admInister each department
the necessary constitutional means and
personal motives to resist encroachments
of the others.

CHAPTER

13

Congress

Congress Versus Parliament

The Organization of Congress:
Committees

The Evolution of Congress
Who Is in Congress?
Sex and Race •

Incumbency •

Party

Do Members Represent Their Voters?
Representational View •
Organizational View • Attitudinal
View

Ideology and Civility in Congress
The Organization of Congress: Parties
and Caucuses
Party Organization of the Senate •
Party Structure in the House • The
Strength of Party Structures • Party
Unity • Caucuses

The Organization of Congress: Staffs
and Specialized Offices
Tasks of Staff Members •
Agencies

Staff

How a Bill Becomes Law
Introducing a Bill • Study by
Committees . Floor Debate-The
House • Floor Debate-The Senate •
Methods of Voting

Reducing Power and Perks
The Post-9/ll Congress

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

2.

Are members of Congress represen tative of the American people?
Does Congress normally do what
most citizens want it to do?

2.

Should Congress run under strong
leadership?
Should Congress act more quickly?

T

he bipartisan Continuity of Government Commission was formed after
~ePtember 11, 2001, to help ensure that America's three branches of
national government would be able to function after a catastrophic attack
that killed or incapacitated large numbers of the nation's legislators, executive branch ofllcials, or judges. In its May 2003 report, the Commission
focused first and foremost on the Un ited States Congress.] This should not
be surprising. Both in the minds of the Federalists (see Chapter 2) and in
terms of its present-day constitutional powers and prerogatives, Congress
was and remains America 's "first branch of government. " As we shall
explain, it has the ultimate power of the purse, can pass a law even if the
president vetoes it, and can alter, profoundly at times, how existing laws are
administered through its oversight of executive agencies. Congress can IU(ewise expand or contract the appell ate jurisdiction of the U.S. Supreme
Court. It may use these powers only rarely, but it has them, and myriad
others, in reserve.
However, Congress is now considered by many to be the system's broken
branch, badly in need of fixing. It has probably been the object of more
mass public mistrust and more eli te reform proposals than either the presidency or the federa l judiciary combined. This is true even though most
incumbent members of Congress who seek reelection win it, and even
though Congress as a whole has pretty consistently expanded the programs
and adopted the reforms that most citizens favor.
Once you master its basics, Congress is full of supremely interesting
political puzzles. Its diverse membership, its daily workings, and its legislative decisions arguably reveal more about America's representative
democracy, past and present, warts and alL than is revealed by any other
institution. It would be only a slight exaggeration to say that he or she who
really knows Congress knows more about American politics than he or she
who knows virtually everything else about the system but not much about
Congress. There is no one key to understanding who governs and to what
ends in America, but if we had to nominate a single candidate, we would
nominate Congress.
The late senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of ew York once remarked
that the United States is the only democratic government that has a legislative branch. Of course, lots of democracies have parliaments that can pass
laws. What he meant is that among the large democracies of the world,
only the U.S. Congress has great powers that it can exercise independently

J

317

Chapter 13

318

Congress

Senator Bill Prist and colleagues voted for a huge expansion in Medicare by
approving a program to provide prescription drugs.

of the executive branch. To see why this is so, we
must understand the difference between a congress
and a parliament.

'*

Congress Versus Parliament

The United States (a long with many Latin Ameri ca n
nations) has a con gress: Great Britain (a long with
most Western European nations) h as a parlia ment. A
hint as to the difference between the two kinds of legislatures can be fo und in th e original meanings of
the words: Congress derives from a Latin term tha t
means "a coming together," a meeting, as of representatives from various places. Parliament comes
from a Fren ch word , parler; th at means "to talk."
There is of course plenty of talking-some critics
say that there is nothing but talking-in the U. S.
Congress, and certainly members of a parliament
represent to a degree their local districts. Bu t th e differences implied by the names of the lawmaking
groups are real ones, with profound significance for
how laws are made and how the government is run.
These differences affect two importa nt aspects of
lawmakin g bodies: how one becomes a member a nd
what one does as a member.
Ordina rily a person becomes a member of a parliament (such as the British House of Commons) by
persuading a political par ty to put his or her name on
the ballot. Though usu ally a loca l party committee
selects a person to be its candid ate, that committee

often ta kes suggestions from nati onal party headquarters. In a ny case the local group selects as its
ca ndidate someone willing to support the n ational
party program and leadership. In the election voters
in the district choose not between two or three personalities running for office, but between two or
three national parties.
By co ntrast, a person becomes a candid ate for
representative or senator in the U.S. Congress by
running in a primary election. Except in a very few
pl aces, political parties exercise li ttle control over th e
choice of who is nomin ated to run for congression al
office. (This is the case even though the person who
wins the primary will describe himself or herself in
the general election as a Democrat or a Republican.)
Voters select candidates in the primaries because of
their personalities, positions on issues, or overall reputation. Even in the general election, where the party
label affects who votes for whom, many citizens vote
"for the man" (or for the woman) , not for the party.
As a result of these different systems, a parlia ment
tends to be made up of people loyal to the n ation al
party leadership who meet to debate and vote on
party issues. A congress, on the other h and, tends to
be made up of people who think of themselves as
independ ent represe ntatives of their districts or
states and who, while willin g to support their party
on ma ny matters, expect to vote as their (or their
co nstitu ents') beliefs and interests require.
Once they are in the legislature, members of a
parliament discover that they can make only one

Congress Versus Parliament
important decision- whether or not to support the
government. The government in a parliamentary
system such as Britain's consists of a prime minister
and various cabinet officers selected from the party
that has the most seats in parliament. As long as the
members of that party vote together, that government will remain in power (until the next election).
Should members of a party in power in parliament
decide to vote against their leaders, the leaders lose
offi ce, and a new government must be formed. With
so much at stake, the leaders of a party in parliament
have a powerful incentive to keep their foll owers in
line. They insist that all members of the party vote
together on almost all issues. If someone refuses, the
penalty is often drastic: the party does not renominate the offend in g member in the next election.
Members of the U.S. Congress do not select the
head of the exec utive branch of government-that is
done by the voters when they choose a president. Far
from making members of Co ngress less powerful,
this makes them more powerful. Represen tatives and
senators can vote on proposed laws without worrying that their votes will cause the government to collapse and without fearing that a failure to support
their party will lead to their removal from the ballot
in the next election. Congress has independent powers. defined by the Constitution. that it can exercise
without regard to presiden tial preferences. Political
parties do not control nominations for office, and
thus they cannot disciplin e members of Congress
who fail to support the party leadership. Because
Congress is constitutionally independent of the president. and because its members are not tightly disciplined by a party leadership, individual members of
Congress are free to express their views and vote as
they wish. They are also free to become involved in
the most minute details of lawmaking. budget making. and supervision of the administration of laws.
They do this through an elaborate set of committees
and subcommittees.
A real parli ament, such as that in Britain. is an
assembly of party representatives who choose a government and discuss major natio nal issues. The
principal daily work of a parliament is debate. A
congress. such as that in the United States, is a meeting place of the representatives of local constituencies-di stricts and states. Members of the U.S.
Congress can initiate. modify. approve. or reject laws,
and they share with the president supervision of the
admini strative agencies of the government. The prin-

Illinois Senator Barack OlJama spoke to the Democratic
National Convention in 2004.

cipal work of a congress is representation and action.
most of which takes place in committees.
What this means in practical terms to the typical
legislator is easy to see. Since members of the British
House of Commons have little independen t power,
they get rather little in return. They are poorly paid,
may have no offices of their own and virtually no
staff, are allowed only small sums to buy stationery.
and can make a few free local telephone calls. Each
is given a desk, a filing cabinet, and a telephone, but
not always in the same place.
By contrast, a member of the U.S. House of Representatives, even a junior one. has power and is rewarded accordingly. For example. in 2004 each member
earned a substantial salary ($150,000) and was entitled to a large office (or "clerk-hire") allowance, to pay
for as many as twenty-two staffers. Each member also
received individual aIlowances for travel, computer
services. and the like. In addition, each member could
mail newsletters and certain other documents to constituents for free using the "franking privilege." Senators. and representatives with seniority. received even

319

320

Ch apter J 3

Congress

HOW THINGS WORK

The Powers of Congress
The powers of Congress are found in Article I, section
8, of the Constitution .
• To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises
• To borrow money
• To regulate commerce with foreign nations and
among the states
• To establ ish rules for naturalization (that is,
becom ing a citizen) and bankruptcy
• To coin mo ney, set its valu e, and punish
counterfeiting
• To fi x the standard of weights and measures
• To establish a post office and post roads
• To issue pat ents and copyrights by inventors and
auth o rs
• To create courts inferior to (that is, below) the
Supreme Cou rt
• To define and punish piracies, felonies on th e high
seas, and crimes against the law of nations

larger beneftts. Each senator was entitled to a generous office budget and legislative assistance allowance
and was free to hire as many staff members as he or
she wished with the money. These examples are not
given to suggest that members of Congress are overrewarded , but only that their importance, as individuals,
in our political system ca n be inferred from the
resources that they command.
Because the United States has a congress made up
of people chosen to represent their states a nd districts, rather than a parliament made up to represent
competing political parties, no one should be surprised to learn that members of the U.S. Congress are
more concerned with their own constituencies and
careers than with the in terests of any organized
party or program of action. And since Congress does
not choose the president, members of Co ngress
know that worrying about the voters they represent
is much more important than worrying about
whether the president succeeds with his programs.
These two factors taken together mean that Congress
tends to be a decentralized institution, with each

• To declare war
• To raise and support an army and navy and make
rules for their governance
• To provide for a militia (reserving to the states the
right to appoint militia officers and to train the
mil itia under congressional rules)
• To exercise exclusive leg islative powers over the
seat of government (that is, the District of Columbia) and other places purchased to be federal facilities (forts, arsena ls, dockyards, and "ot her
needful bu ildings")
• To "make all laws which shall be necessary and
proper for carrying into execution the foregoing
powers, and all other powers vested by this Constitution in the government of the United States"
(Note: This "necessary and proper, " or "elastic,"
clause has been generously interpreted by the
Supreme Cou rt , as explained in Chapter 16.)

member more interested in his or her own views and
those of his or her voters th an with the programs
proposed by the president.
Indeed, Congress was designed by the Founders in
ways that almost inevitably make it unpopular with
voters. Amer icans want government to take action,
fo ll ow a clear course of action, and respond to strong
leaders . Americans dislike politica l arguments, the
activities of special-interest groups, a nd the end less
pullin g and hauling that often precede any congressional decision. But the people who feel this way are
deeply divided about what government should do: Be
liberal? Be conservative? Spend money? Cut taxes?
::y are
Support abortions? Stop abortions? Sinc.
divided, and since members of Congress must worry
about how voters feel, it is inevitable that on controversia l iss ues Congress will engage in endless argumen ts, worry about what interest groups (who
represent different groups of voters) think, and work
out co mpromise decisions. When it does those
things, however, many people feel let down and say
that they have a low opinion of Congress.

The Evolution of Co ngress

Tilree powelji-il Speakers oj the House: Thomas B. Reed (1889- 1891, 1895- 18 99) (leJt) ,
JosepiI G. Cannon (1903- 1911 ) (center), and Sam Rayburn (1941 - 194 7, 194 9-195 3.
1955- 1961 ) (right). Reed put an end to a Jilibuster in the House by reji-Ising to allow dilatory
motions and by counting as "present "-Jar purposes oj a quorum- members in the Hou se even
thouglr they were not voting. Cannon ji,1I·ther enlarged the Speaker's power by reJu sing to recogIlize members who wished to speak without Connon's approval and by increasing the power oj the
Rules Committee, over which he presided. Cannon was stripped oj much oj his power in 1910.
Royburn's influence rested more oniIis obility to persuade than on his Jonnal powers.

Of course, a member of Congress might explain
all these constitu tional facts to th e people, but not
many members are eager to tell their voters that they
do not really understand how Congress was created
and organized. Instead they run for reelection by
promising voters that they wi ll go back to Washington and "clean up that mess."

'*

The Evol ution of Congress

The Framers chose to place legislative powers in the
hands of a congress rather than a parliament for
phil o
.cal and practical reasons. They did not
want to have all powers concentrated in a single governmental institution, even one that was popularly
elected , because they feared that such a concentration could lead to rule by an oppressive or impassioned majority. At the same time, they knew that
the states were jealous of their independence and
would never consent to a national constitution if it
did not protect their interests and strike a reasonable

balance between large and small states. Hence they
created a bicameral (two-chamber) legislaturewith a House of Representatives. to be elected directly by the people. and a Senate, consisting of two
members from each state. to be chosen by the legislatures of each state. Though "all legislative powers"
were to be vested in Congress, those powers would be
shared with the president (who could veto acts of
Congress), limited to powers explicitly conferred on
the fed era l government, and, as it turned out, subject
to the power of the Supreme Court to declare acts of
Congress unconstitutional.
For decades. critics of Congress have complained
that th e body cannot plan or act quickly. They are
right, but two competing values are at stake: centralization versus decentralization. If Congress were to
act quickly and decisively as a body, then there would

bicameral legislature A lawmaking body
made up of two chambers or parts .

321

322

Chapter 13

COl1gress

House History: Six Phases

One of the most pawe/jul Speakers of th e Hou se, Henry
Clay, is shown here addressing the US. Senate around
1850.

Phase One: The Powerful House
During the frrst three administrations-of George
Washington, John Adams, <md Thomas Jeffersonleadership in Congress was often supplied by the
president or his cabinet officers. Rather quickly,
however, Congress began to assert its independence.

have to be stro ng central leadership, restrictions on
debate, few opportunities for stalling tactics, and minim al co mmittee interference. If. on the other hand,
the interests of individu al members-and the constituencies that they represe nt-were to be protected
or enhanced. then there would have to be weak leadership, rules allowing for delay a nd discussion , and
many opportunities for commi ttee activity.
Though there h ave been periods of strong central
leadership in Congress, the general trend, especially
since the mid-twentieth century, has been toward
decen tralizing decision-making a nd enha ncin g the
power of the individual member at the expense of the
con gressional leadership. This decentra lization may
not have been inevitable. Most America n states have
co nstitutional systems quite similar to the federal
one, yet in many state legislatures, such as those in

The House of Representatives was the preeminent
institution, overshadowing the Senate.
Phase Two: The Divided House
In the late 1820s the preeminence of the House
began to wane. Andrew Jackson asserted the
power of the presidency by vetoing legislation that
he did not like. The party unity necessary for a
Speaker, or any leader, to control the House was
shattered by the issue of slavery. Of course, representatives from the South did not attend during the
Civil War, and their seats remained vacant for several years after it ended. A group called the Radical
Republicans, led by men such as Thaddeus Stevens
of Pennsy lvania, produced strong majorities for
measures aimed at punishing the defeated South.
But as time passed, the hot passions the war had
generated began to cool, and it became clear that
the leadership of the House remained weak.
Phase Three: The Speaker Rules
Toward the end of the nineteenth century the
Speaker of the House gained power. When Thomas
B. Reed of Maine became Speaker in 1889 , he
obtained by vote of the Republican majority more
authority than any of his predecessors, including
the right to select the chairmen and members of all
committees. He chaired the Rules Committee a nd
decided what business would come up for a vote,

New York, Massachusetts, and Indiana, the leadership is quite powerfu1. In part the position of these
strong state leg islative leaders may be the result of
the greater strength of political parties in some states
than in the nati on as a whole. In large measure,
however, it is a consequence of permitting state legislative leaders to decide who shall chair what committee and who shall receive what favors.
The House of Representatives, though always powerful, has often changed the way in which it is organized and led. In some periods it has given its leader, the
Speaker, a lot of power; in other periods it has given
much of that power to the chairmen of the House
committees; and in still other periods it has allowed
individual members to acquire great influence. To simplify a complicated story, the box above outlines six different periods in the history of the House.

The Evo lution of COl1gress

what the limitations on debate would be, and who
would be allowed to speak and who would not. In
1903 , Joseph G. Cannon of Illinois became Speaker. He tried to maintain Reed's trad ition, but he had
many enemies within his Repub lican ranks.

Phase Four: The House Revolts
In 1910-1911 the House revolted against "Czar"
Cannon, voting to strip the Speaker of his right to
appoint committee chairmen and to remove him
from the Rules Committee. The powers lost by the
Speaker flowed to the party caucus, the Rules Committee, and the chairmen of the stand ing committees. It was not, however, until the 1960s and
1970s th at House members struck out against all
forms of leadership.
Phase Five: The Members Rule
ewly elected Democrats could not get the House
to vote on a meaningful civil rights bill until 1965
because powerful committee chairmen, most of
them from the South, kept such legislation bottled
up. In response, Democrats changed their rules so
that cha irmen lost much of their a uthority. Beginning in the 19 70s co mmittee cha irmen would no
longer be selected simply on the basis of seniority:
they had to be elected by the members of the
majority party. Chairmen could no longer refuse to
call committee meetings, and most meetings had

The Ho use faces fundamental problems: it wants
to be both big (it has 435 members) and powerful,
and its members want to be powerful both as individual s and as a group. But being big makes it hard for
the House to be powerful unless some small group is
given the authority to run it. If a group runs the
place, however, the individual members lack much
power. Individuals can gain power, but only at the
price of making the House harder to run and thus
reducing its coll ective power in government. There
is no lasting solution to these dilemmas, and so the
House will always be undergoing changes.
The Senate does not fa ce any of these prob lems. It
is small enough (100 members) that it can be run
without giving much authority to any small group of
leaders. In addition. it ha s escaped some of the problems the House once faced. During the period leading
up to the Civil War it wa s carefully balanced so that

to be public. Committees without subcommittees
had to create them and allow their members to
choose subcommittee chairmen. Individua l members' staffs were greatly enlarged, and half of all
majority-party members were cha irmen of at least
one committee or subcommittee.

Phase Six: The Leadership Returns
Since every member had power, it was harder for
the House to get anything done. By slow steps, culminating in some sweeping changes made in
19 9 5, there were effor ts to restore some of the
power the Speaker had once had. The number of
committees and subcommittees was reduced.
Republican Speaker Newt Gingrich dominated the
choice of committee chairmen , often passing over
more senior members for more agreeable junior
ones. But Gingrich 's demise was as quick as his
rise. His decision not to pass some appropriations
bills forced many government offices to close for a
short period. he had to pay a fine for using taxexempt funds for political purposes, and then the
Republicans lost a number of seats in the 1998
election. Gingrich resigned as Speaker and as a
member of the Ho use and was replaced by a more
moderate Speaker, Dennis Hastert of Illinois, with
a penchant for accommodating his colleagues. As
the 109th Congress began in 200 5, Hastcr t was
widely regarded as a powerful speaker.

the number of senators from slaveowning states
exactly equaled the number from free states. Hence
fights over slavery rarely arose in the Senate.
From the first the Senate was small enough that
no time limits had to be placed on how long a senator could speak. This meant that there never was
anything like a Rules Committee that controlled the
amount of debate.
Fina lly. senators were not elected by th e voters
until this century. Prior to that they were picked
instead by state leg islatures. Thus senators were
often the leaders of loca l party organizations, with
an interest in funneling jobs and contracts back to
their states.
The big changes in th e Senate came not from any
fight about how to run it (nobody ever really ran it) ,
but (rom a dispute over how its members should be
chosen. For more than a century after, the Founding

323

324

Chapter 13

Congress

Filibuster

A filibuster is a technique by which a small number of senators attempt to defeat a measure by
talking it to death-that is, by speaking continuously and at such length as to induce the supporters of the measure to drop it in order to get on
with the Senate 's business.
The right to filibuster is governed by the Senate's Rule 22, which allows for unlimited debate
unless at least sixty senators agree to a motion to
cut it off.
Originally filibusterers were sixteenth-century
English and French pirates and buccaneers who
raided Spanish treasure ships. The term came
from a Dutch word, urijbuiter, meaning "freebooter,"' which was converted into the English
word filibuster.
The word came into use in America as a term
for "continuous talking" in the mid-nineteenth
century. One of its first appearances was in 1854,
when a group of senators tried to talk to death the
Kansas-Nebraska Act.

the end of the nineteenth century the Senate was
known as the Millionaires' Club beca use of the number of wealthy party leaders and businessmen in it.
There arose a demand for the direct, popular election
of senators.
Natura lly the Senate reSisted, and without its
approva l the necessary constitutiona l amendment
could not pass Congress. When some states threatened to demand a new constitutional convention, the
Senate feared that such a convention wou ld cha nge
more than just the way in which senators were chosen. A protracted struggle ensued, during which
many state legislatures devised ways to ensure that
the senators they picked would already have won a
popular election. The Senate finally agreed to a constitutional amendment that required the popular
election of its members, and in 1913 the Seventeenth
Amendment was approved by the necessary threefourths of the states. Ironically, given the intensity of
the stru ggle over this question, no great change in the
composition of the Senate resulted ; most of those
members who had first been chosen by state legislatures ma naged to w in reelection by popular vote.

Source: From Safire's Political Dictionary by William Safire. Copyright © 1968, 1972, 1978 by William Safire. Reprinted by permission of Random House, Inc. and the author.

members of the Senate were chosen by state legislatures. Though often t hese legislatures picked popul ar
local figures to be senators. just as often there was
intense poli tical maneuvering a mong the leaders of
various factions, each strugglin g to w in (and sometimes buy) the votes necessary to become senator. By

THE

WAY

WE

BECOME

SE NATOR

NOWADAYS.

A cartoO/1 ji'ol/1 Puck in 1890 expressed populnr resentment over the "Millionnires' Club. " ns the Sennte Iwd
become k , lOW II.

Who Is in Congress?

Hispanics, and Women in Congress, 1971-2006
Senate
Congress
109th (2005- 2006)
108th
107th
106th
105th
104th
103rd
102nd
101st
100th
99th
98th
97th
96th
95th
94th
93rd
92nd (1971 - 1972)

House

Blacks

Hispanics

Women

Blacks

Hispanics

Women

1
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

14
13
13
9
9
8
6
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
0
0
2

37
39
36
39
37
38
38
26
24
23
20
21
17
16
16
15
15
12

23
23
19
19
18
18
17
10
11
11
11
10
6
6
5
5
5
5

59
62
59
58
51
48
47
29
25
23
22
22
19
16
18
19
14
13

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Source: Congressional Quarterly Almanac,

various years.

The other major issue in the development of the
Senate was the filibuster, A filibuster is a prolonged
speech, or series of speeches, made to delay action in
a legislative assembly. It had become a common- and
unpopular- feature of Senate life by the end of the
nineteenth century. It was used by liberals a nd conservatives alike and for lofty as well as self-serv ing
purposes. The first serious effor t to restrict the filibuster came in 1917, after an important foreign policy measure submitted by President Wilson had been
talked to death by, as Wilson put it, "eleven willful
men." Rule 22 was adopted by a Senate fearful of
tying a president's hands during a wartime crisis. The
rule provided that debate co uld be cut off if two-thirds
of the senators present and voting agreed to a "cloture" motion (it has since been revised to allow sixty
senators to cut off debate). Two years later it was first
invoked successfully when the Senate voted cloture to
end, after fifty-five days, the debate over the Treaty of
VersaiUes. Despite the existence of Rule 22, the tradition of unlimited debate remains strong in the Senate.

~ Who Is in Congress?
With power so decentra lized in Congress. the kind
of person elected to it is especially importa nt. Since

each member exercises some influence, the beliefs
a nd interests of each individual affect policy.
Viewed simplistically, most members of Cong ress
seem the same: the typical representative or senator
is a middle-aged white Protestant male lawyer. If all
such perso ns usually thought and voted alike, that
wou ld be an interesting fact, but they do not, and so
it is necessary to explore the great diversity of views
among seemingly similar people.

Sex and R ace
Congress has gradually become less male and less
white. Between 19 50 and 2005 the number of women
in the House increased from nine to fifty-nine and
the number of African Americans Crom two to thirtyseven . There are also twenty-three Hispanic members.
Until recently the Senate changed much more
slowly (see Table 13 .1). Befo re the 1992 election
there were no African Americans and only two women in the Senate. But in 1992 four more women,
including one black woman, Caro l Mosely Braun of

filibuster An attempt to defeat a bill in the
Senate by talking indefinitely. thus preventing
the Senate from taking action to the bill.

325

326

Chapte r 13

Congress

Illino is. were elected. Two more were elected in
1994. when a ative American. Ben Nighthorse
Ca mpbell of Colorado. also became a senator. By
2004. there was one Africa n American and fourteen
women in the Senate.
The relatively small number of African Am ericans
and Hispanics in the House understates their influence, at least when the Democrats are in the majority.
In 1994 four House committees were chaired by
blacks and three by Hispanics. In the same year, however. no woman chaired a conml ittee. The reason for
this difference in power is that the former tend to come
from safe districts (see page 32 7) and thus to have
more seniority than the latter. Since 1995, Republican
control of the House has reduced minority influence.

Incumbency
The most important change that has occurred in the
composition of Congress has been so gradual that

Figure 13.1
-

most people have not noticed it. In the nineteenth
century a large fraction- often a majority- of congressmen served only one term. In 1869. for example. more than half the members of the Ho use were
serv ing their first term in Congress. Being a congressman in those days was not rega rded as a ca reer.
This was in part because the federa l government was
not very impor tan t (most of the interesting political
decisions were made by the states); in part because
travel to Washington . D.C.. was difficult and the city
was not a pleasan t place in which to live; and in par t
because being a congressman did not pay well. Furthermore. many congressiona l districts were highly
competitive. with the two political parties fairly evenly balanced in each.
By the 19 50s. however. serving in Congress had
become a career. Between 1863 and 1969 the proportion of first-termers in the House fell from 58 percent to 8 percent (see Figure 13.1).2 As the public

Changing Percentage of First-Term Members in Congress

House

-

Senate

60

50

OJ

OJ)

40

2c:
OJ

~

OJ

a.

30

c:
ro

OJ

::;:

20

10

2- 10
11 - 20
1791- 1807 1809- 1827

21 - 30
1829- 1847

31- 40
1849- 1867

41 - 50
1869- 1887

51 - 60
1889- 1907

61 - 70
1909- 1927

71- 80
1929- 1947

81 - 90
1949- 1967

Congress an d years
Notes: The 1989 f reshman class in the House was the smallest in history. The 1993 freshman class in the

House was the largest since 1949.
Sources: Data for 90th t hrou gh 103rd congresses are from Congressional Quarterly Weekly Reports. Data

for 69 th through 89th congresses are adapted f rom Nelson W. Polsby, "The Institutiona lization of t he U S
House of Rep resentatives," A merican Political Science Review (Ma rch 1968): 146. Data for 1st through 68th
cong resses are from Stuart A. Rice, Quantita tive Methods in Politics (New York: Knopf , 1928), 296- 297, as
reported in Polsby, 146 . Data for Senate are from N. J. Ornstein, T. J. M ann, and M. J. Malbin, Vital Statistics on Congress, 7989-7 990 (Washington, D.c.: Congressiona l Quarterly Press, 1990),56-57, 59-60; and
Stan ley Harold and Richard Niemi, Vital Statistics on American Politics (Washington, D.c.: Congressional
Quarterly Press, 2001).

91 - 100
101- 105
1969- 1987 1989- 1996

106- 109
1999- 2005

Who Is in Congress?
Figure 13.2

327

Percentage of Incumbents Reelected to Congress

-

House members reelected

- - Se nate members ree lected

-

House members winn ing
with 6 0 % or more of vote

-

Se nate members winning
with 60% or more of vote

100

90
80
~

70

2

~

u

60

~ 50
40
30

1952

1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

Source. Harold W. Stanley and Richard G. Niemi, Vital Statistics on American Politics, 1999-2000 (Washington, D.C : Cong ressional
Quarterl y Press, 2000), table 1-18; 2004 update by Marc Siega l.

took note of this shift. people began to compl ain
about "professional politicia ns" being "out of touch
with the people." A movement to impose term limits
was started. In 1995 the Ho use approved a constitutional amendment to do just th at, but it died in the
Senate. Then the Supreme Court struck down an
effort by a state to impose term limits on its own
members of Congress.
As it turned out, natural political forces were
already doing what the term limits amendment was
supposed to do. The 1992 and 1994 elections
brought scores of n ew members to the House, with
the result that by 1995 the proportion of members
who were serving their first or second terms had
risen sharply. Three things were responsible for this
change. First, when congressional district lines were
redrawn after the 1990 census, a lot of incumbents
found themselves running in new districts that they
couldn't carry. Second , voter disgust at a variety of
Washington political scandals made them receptive
to appeals from cand id ates who co uld describe
themselves as "outsiders. " And third , the Republican
victory in 1994- made possible in part by the conversion of the South from a Democratic bastion to a
Republican stronghold- brought a lot of new faces
to the Capitol.
This influx of freshman members should not
obscure the fact that incumbents still enjoy enormous

advantages in co ngressional elections. 3 Even in
1994, when thirty-five incumbent Democrats lost to
Republicans, over 90 percent of all House members
who ran for reelection were reelected. In the Senate
92 percent of incumbents who ran aga in were
reelected. In 2004, one of the most hotly contested
elections in recent history, only ten of the four hundred Ho use incumbents who ran for reelection lost.
The arrival of scores of new faces in the 1990s
should not obscure the fact that most House members
still win big in their districts. Political scientists call districts that have close elections (when the willner gets
less than 55 percent of the vote) marginal districts
and districts where incumbents win by wide margins
(55 percent or more) safe districts. The proportion of
House incumbents who h ave won reelection with at
least 60 percent of the vote increased from about
three-nrths ill the 1950s and early 1960s to threequarters ill the 1970s and almost nine-tenths in the
late 1980s (see Figure 13.2). Even as this trend began
marginal districts

Political districts in which
candidates elected to the House of Representatives win in close elections, typically by less
than 55 percent of the vote .

safe districts

Districts in which incumbents
win by margins of 55 percent or more .

328

Chapter 13

Congress

Congress Reelected
House, 1956-2004
Number of
Incumbents Running
in General Election

Year
1956
1958
1960
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004

403
390
400
376
388
401
397
389
373
383
381
377
392
383
406
391
407
406
349
383
383
400
403
394
405

Percentage of Incumbents
Reelected with at least
60 Percent of the Vote
59.1%
63 .1
58.9
63.6
58.5
67.7
72.2
77.3
77.8
66.4
71.9
78.0
72.9
68.9
74.6
86.4
88.5
76.4
65.6
64.5
73.6
77.2
81 .1
83 .5
82.2

•

Senate, 1944-2004
Election
Period
1944-1948
1950-1954
1956-1960
1962-1966
1968-1972
1974-1978
1980-1984
1986-1990
1992- 1994
1996- 1998
1998-2000
2000-2002
2002-2004

Number of
Incumbents Running
in General Election

Percentage of Incumbents
Reelected with at least
60 Percent of the Vote

61
76
84
86
74
70
84
87
53
49
29
29
27

39.3%
35.5
42.9
44.2
44.6
41.4
54.1
57.5
43.4
57.1
65.5
69.0
55.6

Source: Harold W. Stanley and Richard G. Niemi, Vital Statistics on American Politics, 2001-2002 (Washington, D.c.. Congressional Quarterly

Press, 2001 ), table 1-18; 2002- 2004 update by Marc Siegal.

to cha nge in 1990, most House districts remained
safe. Senators remained less secure: the rule, to which

the period 1980- 1990 and the year 1998 are the
exceptions, is that fewer than half of Senate incumbents win with as much as 60 percent of the vote (see
Table 13.2).
Why congressional seats have become less margin al- that is, sa fer- is a matter on which scho la rs
do not agree. Some fee l that it is the result of te levision a nd other media. But ch all engers ca n go on television, too, so why should this benefit incumbents?
Another poss ibility is that voters are becoming less
and less likely to automatica lly support whatever
candidate wins the nomination of their own party.
They are more iU<ely, in short. to vote for the person
rather than the party. And they are more likely to
have heard of a person who is an incumbent: incumbents can deluge the voter with free mailings, they
can travel frequently (and at public expense) to meet
co nstituents, and they can get their names in the
newspaper by sponsoring bills or conductin g investigations. Simply having a familiar name is important
in getting elected, and incumbents find it easier than
cha llengers to make their names known.
Finally, some scho lars argue that incumbents can
use their power to get programs passed or funds
spent to bene fit their districts- a nd thereby to benefi t
themselves. They can help keep an army base open,
support th e bu ilding of a new highway (or block the
building of an unpopular one) , take credit for federa l
grants to local schools and hospitals, make certain
that a particular industry or labor union is protected
by tariffs aga in st foreign competition, and so on.4
Probably all of these factors make some difference. Whatever the explanation, the tendency of voters to return incumbents to office means that in
ordinary times no one should expect any dramatic
changes in the composition of Congress.

Party
From 1933 to 2004 thirty-six Congresses convened
(a new Congress convenes every two years). The
Democrats controlled both houses in twenty-five of
these Congresses and at least one house in twentynine of them. Scholars differ in their explanations of
why the Democrats have so thoroughly dominated
Congress. Most of the research on the subject has
fo cused on the reasons for Democratic contro l of the
House.
AsTable 13.3 shows. in every election from 1968
to 1992 the percentage of the popu lar vote for
Republican candidates to the House was higher than
the percentage of House seats that actually went to

Who Is in Congress?
Table 13.3

Year

1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002

Republican Vote-Seat Gap, 1968-2002

Percent age of Popular
Vot e for Republican
Ho use Candidates

48.2 %
44.5
46.4
40.5
42 .1
44.7
48.0
43 .3
47 .0
44.6
45.5
45.0
45.6
52.4
48.9
48 .7
48 .7
53.4

Percentage of
House Seats Held
by Republicans

44.1%
41.4
44.2
33.1
32.9
36.3
44.1
38.2
41.8
40.7
40.2
38.4
40.5
52.9
52.2
51.3
50.8
52.4

Source: Harold W. Stanley and Richard G. Niemi, Vital Statistics on
American Politics, 2001-2002 (Washington, D.C: Congressional
Quarterly Press, 2001), table 1-12.

Republicans. For example, in 1976 the Republicans
won 42.1 percent of the vote but received only 32 .9
percent of the seats. Some have argued that this gap
between votes and seats has occurred because Democratic-controlled state legislatures have redrawn
congression al district maps in ways that make it hard
for Republicans to win House seats. There is some
striking anecdotal evidence to support this conclusion. For example, followin g the 1990 census, the
Democratic-controlled Texas legislature crafted a
new congressional district map clearly designed to
benefit Democrats. In 1992 Republicans won 48 percent of the House vote in Texas but received only 30
percent of the seats. Similarly, in 1984 Democrats in
California won nine more congressional seats than
did Republicans, even though the latter received
about one hundred thousand more votes statewide.
After 1990 California's congress ional map was
redrawn by a state court, and in 1992 Republican
House candidates won 41 percent of the statewide
vote and 42 percent of the seats. 5 Only in 1994, with
the historic election of the first Republica n majorities
in Congress in four decades, did the gap close and
begin to work slightly in Republicans' favor.

Partisan tinkering with district maps and other
structural features of House elections is not a sufficient explanation of why Democrats dominated the
House until 1994. As one study concluded, "Virtually all the political science evidence to date indicates
that the electoral system has little or no partisan
bias, and that the net gains nationally from redistricting for one party over another are very small. "6
To control the redistricting process, one party must
control both houses of the legislature, the governor's
office, and, where necessary, the state courts . These
conditions simply do not exist in most states. And
even if district lines were consistently drawn with
scrupulous fairness , the Democrats would still win
control of the House, because they win more votes.
The pre-199 4 Republican vote-seat gap is accounted
for in part by the fact that the Democrats tend to do
exceptionally well in low-turnou t districts such as
minority-dominated inner cities, while the Republicans tend to do well in high-turnout districts such as
affluent white suburbs.
In 1994, however, the year the gap closed ,
Republican candidates for the House ran especially
strong in the roughly half of all districts that have
predominantly suburban constituencies. Thus even
though only 19 percent of eligible voters cast a vote
for a Republican, it was enough to best the Democrats, who won the votes of only 16.6 percent of
all eligible voters.
Congressional incumbents have come to enjoy
certain built-in electoral advantages over challengers. Democrats were in the majority as the
advantages of incumbency grew, but Republicans
have enjoyed the same or greater advantages since
1994. Studies suggest that the incumbency advantage was worth about two percentage points prior to
the 19 60s but h as grown to six to eight points today.
By 2004, the Republican share of House seats
had risen from 176 in 1992 to 232, a 31 percent
increase. The closing of the GOP vote-seat gap in the
House was accompanied by a rise in the number of
Republican senators (5 5 in 2005, the most senate
seats held by Republicans since 1949, and including
five new Republican senators in the South), state legislators (from 3,0 31 in 1992 to 3,650 in 2005), and
governorships (from 18 in 1992 to 28 in 2005). This
has led some leading academic experts, including
Walter Dean Burnham, to spec ulate that the sudden shift to Republican control of the House that
occurred in 1994 h as now been succeeded by "a

329

330

Chapter 13

Congress

stable pattern of Repub lican rule" at the federal level
and in most states. 7
While scholars debate whether, in fact, the historic 1994 House elections had by 2004 ushered in a
Republican-dominated critical or realigning period
(see Chapter 9) in American politics, it is important
to remember that from time to time major electora l
convulsions do alter the membership of Congress.
For example, in the election of 1938 the Democrats
lost seventy seats in the House; in 1942 they lost
fifty; in 1950 they lost twenty-nine; and in 1966
they lost forty-eight. Despite these big losses, the
Democrats retained a majority in the House in each
of these years. Not so, however, in 1994, when the
Democrats lost fifty-two House seats (the largest loss
by either party since the Republicans lost seventyfive seats in 1948), and Republicans gained majorities in both the House and the Senate.
Just as it is not easy to explain why Democrats
dominated Congress for half a century, so it is not
easy to explain why that domination ended when
and as it did. Several reasons, however, stand out.
By the 1990s the advan tages of incumbency had
turned into disadvantages: voters increasingly came
to dis like "professional politicians. " whom they held
responsib le for "the mess in Washington." Just what
"the mess" was varied according to which voter you
asked, but it included chronic budget deficits, the
congressional habit of exempting itself from laws
that affected everybody else, constant bickering
between Congress and the White House, and various
congressional scandals. Dur ing the 1980s about
forty members of Congress were charged with misconduct ranging from having sex with minors to
accepting illegal gifts. When it was disclosed that the
House had its own bank that would cash checks even
for members who (temporarily) had no funds in their
accounts, public indignation exploded, even though
almost no taxpayer money was lost. Public respect
for Congress, as measured by the polis, plummeted.
The Democrats had the misfortune of being the
majority party in Congress when all of this happened. The anti-incumbent mood, coupled with the
effects of redistricting after the 1990 census and the
shift of the South to the Republican party, brought

conservative coalition

An alliance between
Republican and conservative Democrats.

the Republicans into power in the House and Senate
in the 1994 elections.
In the past the Democratic party was more deeply
divided than the Republicans, because of the presence in Congress of conservative Democrats from the
South. Often these southern Democrats wou ld vote
with the Republicans in the House or Senate, thereby
forming what came to be called the conservative
coalition. During the 1960s and 1970s that coa lition came together in about one-fifth of all roll-cali
votes. When it did , it usually won, defeating northern Democrats. But since the 1980s, and especially
since the watershed election of 1994, the conservative coalition has become much less important. The
reason is simple: many southern Democrats in Congress have been replaced by southern Republicans,
and the southern Democrats who remain (many of
them African Americans) are as liberal as northern
Democrats. The effect of this change is to make Congress, and especially the House, more ideologically
partisan- Democrats are liberals, Republicans are
conservatives-and this in turn helps explain why
there is more party unity in voting.

Do Members Represent
Their Voters?
In a decentralized , individualistic institution such as
Congress, it is not obvious how its members will
behave. They could be devoted to doing whatever
their constituents want or, since most voters are not
aware of what their representatives do, act in accordance with their own beliefs, the demands of pressure groups, or the expectations of congressional
leaders. You may think it would be easy to figure out
whether members are devoted to their constituents
by analyzing how they vote, but that is not quite
right. Members can influence legislation in many
ways other than by voting: they can conduct hearings, help mark up bills in committee meetings, and
offer amendments to the bills proposed by others. A
member's fina l vote on a bill may concea l as much as
it revea ls: some members may vote for a bill that contains many things they dislike because it also contains a few things they value.
There are at least three theories about how members of Congress behave: representational, organizational, and attitudinal.

Do Members Represent Their Voters?
The representational explanation is based on the
reasonabl e assumption that members want to get
reelected, and therefore they vote to please their constituents. The organizational expla nation is based on
the equally reasonable ass umption that since most
constituents do not know how their legislator has
voted, it is not essential to please them. But it is
important to please fellow members of Congress,
whose goodwill is valuable in getting things done
and in acquiring status and power in Congress. The
attitudinal explanation is based on the assumption
that there are so many conflicting pressures on
members of Congress that they cancel one another
out, leaving them virtually free to vote on the basis of
their own beliefs.
Political scienti sts have studied, tested, and
argued about these (and other) exp lanations for
decades, and nothing like a co nsensus has emerged.
Some facts have been established, however.

Political issues may be national. but campaigning for ojjice is
intensely local. as wilen Dennis Hastert (michl/e) talks to fa ctory
employees in his 1/Ii110is district.

Representational View
The representational view has some merit under
certain circumstances-namely, when constituents
have a cl ea r view on some iss ue and a legislator'S
vote on that issue is likely to attract their attention.
Such is often the case for civil rights laws: representatives with significant numbers of black voters in
their di stricts are not likely to oppose civil rights bills;
representatives with few Africa n Americans in their
districts are comparatively free to oppose such bills.
(Until the late 1960s many southern representatives
were able to oppose civil rights measures because the
African Americans in their districts were prevented
from voting. On the other hand , many representatives without black co nstituents have supported civil
r ights bills, partly out of personal belief and partly,
perhaps, because certain white groups in their districts-organized liberals, for example-have insisted on such support. )
One study of congressional roll-call votes and
constituency opinion showed that the cor relation
between the two was quite strong on civil rights bills.
There was also a positive (though not as strong) correlation between roll-call votes and constituency
opinion on social welfare measures. Scarcely any
correlation, however. was found between congressional votes and hometown opinion on foreign policy
measures. 8 Foreign policy is generally remote from
the daily interests of most Americans, and public
opinion about such matters can change rapidly. It is

331

not surpnslOg, therefore, that congressional votes
and constituent opinion should be different on such
questions.
From time to time an issu e aro uses deep pass ions
among the voters, and legislators cannot escape the
need either to vote as their constituents want, whatever their personal views, or to anguish at length
about which side of a divided constituency to support. Gun control has been one such question, the
use of federal money to pay for abor tions has been
another. and the effort to impeach President Clinton
was a third. Some for tunate members of Congress
get unambiguous cues from their constituents on
these matters, and no hard decision is necessary.
Others get conflicting views, and they know that
whichever way they vote, it may cost th em dearly in
the next election. OccaSionally members of Congress
in this fix will try to be out of town when the matter
comes up for a vote. One careful study found that
constituen cy influences were an important factor in
Senate votes ,9 but no comparable study has been
done for the House.
You migh t think that members of Congress who
won a close race in the last election-who come from
a "marginal" district-would be especially eager to
vote the way that their constituents want. Research
so far has shown that is not generally the case. There
seem to be about as many independent-minded members of Congress from marginal as from safe districts.

33 2

Chapter 13

Congress

Perhaps it is because opinion is so divided in a marginal seat that one cannot please everybody; as a
result the representative votes on other grounds.
In general. the problem with the representational
explanation is that public opinion is not strong and
clear on most measures on which Congress must
vote. Many representatives and senators fa ce constituencies that are divided on key issues. Some constituents go to special pains to make their views
known (these interest groups were discussed in Chapter 11). But as we indicated, the power of interest
groups to affect congressional votes depends , among
other things, on whether a legislator sees them as
united and powerful or as disorganized and marginal.
This does not mean that constituents rarely have
a direct inl1uence on voting. The in fluence that they
have probably co mes from the fact that legislators
risk defeat should they steadfastly vote in ways that
can be held against them by a rival in the next election. Though most congressiona l votes are not
known to most citizens, blunders (real or alleged)
quickly become known when an electoral opponent
exploits them.
Still, any member of Congress can choose the positions that he or she takes on most roll-ca ll votes (and
on all voice or standing votes, where names are not
recorded). And even a series of recorded votes that
are against constituency opinion need not be fatal: a
member of Congress can win votes in other waysfor example, by doing services for constituents or by
appealing to the party loyalty of the voters.

Organizational View
When voting on matters where constituency interests or opinions are not vitally at stake, members of
Congress respond primarily to cues provided by their
colleagues. This is the organizational explanation of
their votes. The principal cue is party; as already
noted, what party a member of Congress belongs to
explains more about his or her voting record than
any other single factor. Additional organizational
cues come from the opinions of co lleagues with
whom the member of Congress feels a close ideological affinity: for libera ls in the House it is the Democratic Study Group; for conservatives it has often been
the Republican Study Committee or the Wednesday
Club. But party and other organizations do not have
clear pOSitions on all matters. For the scores of votes
that do not involve the "big questions ," a representative or senator is especially likely to be influenced by

the members of his or her party on the sponsoring
committee.
It is easy to understand why. Suppose you are a
Democratic representative from Michigan who is
summoned to the floor of the House to vote on a bill
to authorize a new weapons system. You haven't the
faintest idea what issues might be at stake. There is
no obvious liberal or conservative position on this
matter. How do you vote? Simple. You take your cue
from several Democrats on the House Armed Services Committee that handled the bill. Some are libera l; others are conservative. If both libera ls and
conservatives support the bill, you vote for it unhesitatingly. If they disagree, you vote with whichever
Democrat is generally closest to your own political
ideology. If the matter is one that affects your state,
you can take your cue from members of your state's
delegation to Congress.

Attitudinal View
Fina lly, there is evidence that the ideology of a member of Congress affects how he or she votes. We have
seen that Democratic and Republican legislators differ sharply on a libera l-versus-conservative scale. On
both domestic and fore ign po licy issues many tend to
be consistently liberal or conservative. 10
This consistency isn't surprising. As we saw in
Chapter 7, political elites think more ideologically
th an the public generally.
On many issues the average member of the House
has opinions close to those of the average voter. Senators, by contrast, are often less in tune with public
opinion. In the 1970s they were much more liberal
than voters; in the early 1980s more conservative.
Two senators from the same state often mobilize
quite different bases of support. The result is that
many states, such as California, Delaware, and New
York, have been represented by senators with almost
diametrically opposed views.
Of late, the Senate has gone through three phases.
In the first, during the 1950s and early 1960s, it was
a cautious , conservative institution dominated by
southern senators and displaying many of the fea tures of a "club" that welcomed members into its
inner circle only after they had displayed loyalty to its
gentlemanly (and, in effect, conservative) customs.
This was the era when the Senate was the graveyard
of civil rights bills.
The second period began in the mid-1960s as liberal senators rose steadily in number, seniority, and

Ideology and Civility in Congress

influence, helped along by the Johnson reforms,
which made it easier for junior senators to gain
chairmanships. The decentralization of the Senate
gave more power to individual senators. including
liberals . In 1972 there were about twenty-four liberal senators, but among them they held ['arty subcommittee chairmanships.I1
The third period began in the late 1970s and
became most visible after the 1980 elections, when
many liberals lost their sea ts to conservative Republicans. The conservatism of the present Senate
is based more on ideology than on the rules of the
southern "club" that cha racterized it in the 1950s.
The Democratic party is more deeply divided than
the Repub lican. There are only a few liberal Republicans, but there have been many more conservative
Democrats from the South and West. Southern
Democrats often teamed up with Republicans to form
a conservative coalition. In a typical year a majority
of Republ icans and so uthern Democrats would vote
together against a majority of northern Democrats
about 20 to 25 percent of the time. When the conservative coalition did form , it usually won: between
1970 and 1982 it won about two-thirds of the votes
on which it held together. After the Reaga n victory
and the Republican gain of thirty seats in the House
in 1981, the conservative coalition became even
more effective, dominating key votes on the Reagan
budget and tax plans.
But the conservative coa li tion was important only
when there were a lot or conservative southern
Democrats. Many of these have now been replaced
with southern Republica ns. As a result almost all of
the conservatives are now in the Repub lica n party. so
there is not much of a coa lition left to form. In 1998
this coalition- that is, a majority of Republicans and
southern Democrats voting against a majority of
northern Democrats-existed in only 6 percent of all
congressiona l votes. In the 1970s. by contrast, it
appeared in about one-quarter of all votes.

Ideology and Civility in
Congress
Co ngress has become an increasingly ideological
organization. By that we mean its members are more
sharply divided by political ideology than they once
were and certainly more divided than are American

voters. In short, the attitudinal explanation of how
members vote has increased in importance, while the
organizationa l explanation has declined . All of Congress's most liberal members are Democrats. and all
of its most conservative ones are Republica ns. That is
not what you would find among ordinary voters. A
lot of us split our tickets, voting for one pa rty's pres idential nominee and a different party's congress ional candidate.
This higher level of congressional ideology does
not mean that its existing members have changed
how they think. Rather it means that new kinds of
members have been elected, bringing to Congress a
more ideological perspective. 12 In 1974 (the election
right after Watergate) a large number of more ideological Democrats entered Co ngress. In 1994 there
was a large influx of more ideo logical Republicans.
Congress has become more polarized than voters
in terms of political beliers. Among voters the average Democrat and the average Republican, though
they surely disagree, nonetheless have views that put
them close to the center of the political spectrum.
But among members of Congress the avera ge Democrat is very liberal and the average Republi can very
conservative. a fact that keeps them far from the
political center. There are, of course, some conservative Democrats and some liberal Republica ns. but
their numbers have been getting smaller and smal ler.
One result of this polarization is that members of
Congress, especially those in the Hou se, do not get
along as well as they once did with members who
disagree with them, and they are more likely to
challenge, investigate, and denounce one another.
Two Speakers of the House, Jim Wright and Newt
Gingrich, were investigated and resigned. Many presidential nominees have been subjected to withering
investigation s, some based on ideological differences
and some on charges of ethical violations, many
of which were dubious. President Clinton was
impeached on a nea rly party-line vote. Members regularly accuse one another of misconduct. When they
run [or reelection, they often use negative ads of the
sor t discussed in Chapter 10. The mass media feed on
and agg ravate this tendency because of their interest
in scandal.
The result is that the public- already puzzled by
the constitutional need members have to discuss policy matters for long periods, listen to interest groups,
and reach compromise settlements- are now put ofr
even more by the political disposition members have

333

334

Chapter 13

Congress

The Organization of
Congress: Parties and Caucuses

Whip

A whip is a party leader who m akes certain that
party members are present for a vote and vote the
way the party wishes. In the British House of Commons th e whips produce strong party votes; in the
u.s. Congress whips are a lot less successful.
The word comes from whipper-in, a term from
fo x hun ting denoting the person whose job it is
to keep the houn ds from straying off the trail. It
became a political term in England in the eighteenth century, and from there came to the
United States.
Source: From Safire's Political Dictionary by William Safire. Copyright © 1968, 1972, 1978 by William Safire. Reprinted by permission of Random House, Inc. and the author.

to attack one another. At one time the constitutional
need to negotiate was facilitated by reasonably good
relationships between Democrats and Republicans,
most of whom treated one another with politeness
and socialized together after hours. This congenial
social relationship no longer exists in most cases, and
the public has noticed.

majority leader

The legislative lead er elected
by party members holding the majority of
seats in the House or the Senate .

minority leader

The legislative leader elected
by party members holding a m inority of seats
in the House or the Senate.

Congress is not a single organization; it is a vast and
complex collection of organizations by which the
business of the legislative branch is carried on and
through which its members form alliances. If we
were to look inside the British House of Commons.
we would find only one kind of organization of any
importance- the po li tica l party. Though party
organization is important in the U.S. Congress, it is
only one of many important elements. In fact other
organizations have grown in number as the influence of the parties has declined.
The Democrats and Republicans in the House and
the Senate are organized by party leaders. The key
leaders in turn are elected by the full party membership within the House and Senate. The description
that follows is confined to the essential positions.

Party Organization of the Senate
The majority party chooses one of its membersusually the person with the greatest seniority- to be
Ii> eSJaen p tempore of the Senate. It is l~
<imIler:ifi€ I3EJsitien;
·.rect:h~ th
0HStitUU so that
the Senate will have a presiding officer in the absence
of the vice president of the United States (who is also,
according to the Constitution, the president of the
Senate) . In fact, presiding over the Senate is a ,
.chore that neither the vice president nor the president
pro tem relishes, and so the actual task of presiding is
usually assigned to some junior senator.
The real leadership is in the hands of the majority leader (chosen by the senators of the majority
party) and the minority leader (chosen by the senators of the other party) . In addition. the senators of
each party elect a whip. The principal task of the
maierity leader is to schenule ru busim~ss 0 h
Senate, usually in consultation with the minority
leader. The majority leader has the 19h Q41e:-reGog1iJ1zed fifst in 8 ll..}diOO); @bate. A majority leader with
a strong personality who is ski lled at po litical bargaining may do much more. Lyndon Johnson, who
was Senate majority leader for the Democrats during
much of the 1950s, used his prod igious ability to
serve the needs of fellow senators. He helped them
with everything from obtaining extra office space to
getting choice committee assignments. and in this

The Organization of Congress: Parties and Caucuses
way he acquired substantial influ ence over the substance as well as the schedule of Senate business.
Johnson's successor, Mike Mansfield. was a less
assertive majority leader and had less influen ce.
The
'1" is a senator who helps the party leader
stay: ~nfor.
b~1I what pal't!
emb€n's al' h:in~
ing, ounds up members when important votes are to
be taken, and attempts to keep a nose count on how
the voting on a controversial issue is likely to go. The
whip has several senators who assist him or her in
this task.
Each party in the Senate also chooses a Policy
Committee composed of a dozen or so senators who
help the party lea der schedule Senate business ,
choosin g what bills are to be given major attention
and in what order.
From the point of view of individual senators,
however, the key party organization is the group that
assigns senators to the standing committees of the
Senate. The Democrats have a Steering Committee
that does this; the Republicans have a Committee
on Committees. These assignments are especia lly important for newly elected senators: their political
careers, their opportunities for favorable publicity,
and their chances for helping their states and their
supporters depend in great part on the committees to
which they are assigned.
Party control of the Senate has changed frequently.
When George W. Bush took office in 2001, the Republicans briefly retained control by having 50 seats plus
a tie~breaking vote cast by Vice President Cheney. But
then Senator James Jeffords . a Republican. became an
independent and voted to let the Democrats control it,
51 to 49. But that ended when the Republicans won
enough seats in the 2002 election to regain controL
Having a tiny majority in the Senate does not affect
most important votes since the other side can filibuster, but having your own party control the chairmanships is very important because it helps determine
what issues will get to the floor for a vote.
The key- and delicate- aspect of selecting party
lea ders, of making up the important party committees, and of assigning freshman senators to Senate
committees is achieving ideological and regiona l balance. Liberals and conservatives in each party will
fight over the choice of majority and minority leader,
but factors in addition to ideology playa part in the
choice. These include personal popularity, the ab ili ty
of the leader to make an effective television appearance, and who owes whom what favors.

Minority leader Nancy Pelosi, the first woman to hold a
party leadership role in Congress.

Party Structure in the House
Though the titles of various posts are different, the
party structure is essentially the same in the House
as in the Senate. Leadership carries more power in
the House than in the Senate because of the House
rules. Being so large (435 members), the House must
restri ct debate and schedule its business with great
care; thus leaders who do the scheduling and who
determine how the rules shall be applied usually
have substantial influence.
The Speaker is the most important person in the
House. He is elected by whichever party has a majority, and he presides over all House meetings. Unlike
whip A senator or representative who helps
the party leader stay informed about what
party members are thinking.

335

336

Chapte r 13

Congress

HOW THINGS WORK

Party Leadership Structure in 2005
SENATE
President
party

Pro

Tempore

Selected

by

majority

Democrats
Minority Leader Leads the party
Minority Whip Assists the leader, rounds up votes,
heads group of deputy whips
Chairman of the Conference Presides ove r meetings of all Senate Democrats
Policy Committee Schedules legislation
Steering Committee Assigns Democratic senators to
committees
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee Provides
funds, assistance to Democratic candidates for the
Senate
Republicans
Majority Leader Leads the party
Assistant Majority Leader Assists the leader, rounds
up votes
Chairman of the Conference Presides over meetings
of all Senate Republicans
Policy Committee Makes recommendations on party
policy
Committee on Committees Assigns Republican senators to committees
Republican Senatorial Committee Provides funds, advice to Republican candidates for the Senate

the president pro tern of the Senate, however, his
position is anyth ing but honorific. He is the principal
leader of the majority party as well as the presiding
officer of the entire House. Though Speakers-aspresiders are expected to be fair, Speakers-as-partyleaders are expected to use their powers to help pass
legislation favored by their party.
In h elping his par ty, the Speaker has some important formal powers at his disposal: he decides who
shall be recognized to speak on the floor of the
House; he rules whether a motion is relevant and
germane to the business at hand; and he decides

HOUSE
Speaker of the House

Selected by majority party

Democrats
Minority Leader Leads the party
Minority Whip Assists the leader, rounds up votes,
heads group of deputy and assistant whips
Chairman of the Caucus Presides over meetings of
all House Democrats
Steering and Policy Committee Schedules legislation,
assigns Democratic representatives to committees
Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee Provides funds, advice to Democratic candidates for the
House
Republicans
Majority Leader Leads the party
Majority Whip Assists the leader, rounds up votes,
heads large group of deputy and assistant whips
Chairman of the Conference Presides over meetings of all House Republicans
Committee on Committees Assigns Republican representatives to committees
Policy Committee Advises on party policy
National Republican Congressional Committee Provides funds, advice to Republican candidates for
the House
Research Committee On request, provides information about issues

(subj ect to certa in ru les) the committees to which
new bills shall be ass igned . He influences what bills
are brou ght up for a vote and appo in ts the members
of special and select committees (to be expla ined on
pages 34 1-345). Si nce 1975 the Speaker has been
able to nomin ate the majority-party mem bers of the
Rules Committee. He also has some informal powers:
he controls some patronage jobs in the Cap ito l building a nd the assignment of extra office space. Even
thoug h he is far less powerful than in the days of
Clay, Reed, and Cannon, the Speaker is still an impo rtant person to h ave on one's side. Sam Ray burn of

The Organization of Congress: Parties and Caucuses
Figure 13.3

The U.S. Congress

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
l. House Minority Whip
2. Lobby
3. House chamber
4. Cloakrooms
5. Speaker of the House
6. Ways and Mean s Committee
7. House Minority Lead er

SENATE
8 . Senate Minority Leader
9 . Office of the Secretary
10. Senate chamber
11. Cloakrooms
12. Senate Majority Leader
13 . Vice President

The House and Senate meet at opposite ends of the Capitol building. When there is a joint session of Congressfor example, to hear the president' s State of the Union address-the senators sit with the representatives in the
House chamber. Though the most important work of Congress goes on in comm ittee meetings, which are held in
office buildings behind the Capitol , some important politi ca l negotiations occur in the offices surround in g the
chambers- especially in th e c loakrooms (actually, lounges) and the offices of th e majority and minority leaders,
the Speaker and the vice president, an d the sec retary of the Senate.

Texas exercised great influence as Speaker, and Tip
O'Neill, Jim Wright, Tom Foley, and Newt Gingrich
tried to do the same.
In the House, as in the Senate, the majority party
elects a floor leader, called the majority leader. The
other party also chooses a leader-the minority
leader. Traditionally the majority leader becomes
Speaker when the person in that position dies or
retires-provided, of course, that the departing
Speaker's party is still in the majority. Each party also
has a whip, with several assistant whips in charge of
rounding up votes from various state delegations.
Committee assignments are made and the scheduling of legislation is discussed, by the Democrats, in a

Steering and Po licy Committee, chaired by the
Speaker. The Republica ns have divided committee
assignments and policy discussions, with the former
task assigned to a Committee on Committees and the
latter to a Policy Committee. Each party also has a
congressional campaign committee to proVide funds
and other assistance to party members running for
election or reelection to the House.

The Strength of Party Structures
One important measure of the strength of the parties
in Congress is the ability of party leaders to get their
members to vote together on the rules and structure
of Congress. When Newt Gingrich became Speaker

337

338

Chapter 13

Congress

of the Republican-co ntrolled House in 19 95 , he proposed sweeping changes in Hou se rules, many not
popular with some Republican members, For example, he wa nted no one to serve as a co mmittee cha irma n for more than six years, for three committees to
be abo lish ed, and for other committees to lose eith er
functions or members, He a lso wanted to pass over
some senior members in picking committee chairmen, Though these moves adversely affected some
Repub lican representatives , they a U voted in favor of
the new ru les.1 3 Of course, Gingrich wo uld not have
made these proposals unless he was certa in he could
get them adopted , But it was a measure of his influence a nd support among new ly elected Republicans
that even major chan ges in congressional procedures would get unanimou s party support.1 4 Getting
support on proposed legislation is a h arder task,
The Senate is another matter. As Barbara Sinclair
has argued, in the last few decades the Senate h as
been transformed by changes in norm s (informal
understandings governing how members ought to
behave toward their colleag ues). without any farreaching changes i.n the written Senate ru les,) 5
Compared to the Senate of the 1950s a nd 1960s,
today's Senate is less party-centered, less leaderor iented. more hospitable to freshmen (w ho no
longer have to "pay their du es" before assum ing
major roles as legislators) , more heav ily sta ffed, and
more subcommittee-oriented,

Party Unity
The strength of Congress's elaborate party machinery ca n also be meas ured by the extent to which
members of a party vote together in the House a nd
Senate, Party pola rization is defined as a vote in
which a majority of voting Democrats oppose a
majority of voting Repub licans, In seven of the thirteen years from 1953 to 1965, at least half of all
House votes pitted a majority of voting Democrats
against a majority of voting Republicans (see Table
13,4), But in 19 66 the number dropped to 41 percent. and it was not until 1983 that voti ng in the
House once aga in took on a distinctively partisan
cast. By the 1990s party unity voting was the norm
in both the House and the Senate, A kindred meas ure
of party strength is the cohesion of the parties on
party pola rization

A vote in wh ich a maj o rity
of Democratic legislators o ppose a maj ority of
Republi ca n legis lators ,

votes that eli cit a party split. By th is measure,
between 1991 and 1994 over 80 percent of all
House and Senate Democrats voted with a majority
of their party on party unity votes. as did over 80
percent of House and Senate Republica ns,
As these recent trend s make plain, party unity in
Co ngress is hard ly a thing of the past. Specific issues
ca n trigger a n extraordinary degree of party cohesion, For examp le. in 19 93 every single Republica n
in both the House and Senate voted against the Clinton budget pl a n. the first budget offered by a Democratic president since Jimmy Carter left office in 1980,
Th is may be an extreme example. but it reflects
the increas ingly adversarial relationship between
Democrats a nd Republica ns. especially in the House,
Sti ll , it is worth remembering that even today 's
Congress is less divided a long party lines than many
of its predecessors were, During the yea rs 18901910, for exa mple. two-thirds of a ll votes evoked a
party split. and in severa l sessions more than half the
roll calls found 90 percent of each party's members
opposing the other party.1 6 Whereas the party splits
of the past often reflected the routine operations of
highly disciplined parties interested ma inly in winning elections. dispensing patronage. and keeping
power. today's party splits often reflect sharp ideologica l differences between the parties (or at least
between their respective leaders) ,
The sharp increase in party votes a mong members of Congress since 1970 is remarkable, since it is
not obvious that the Americans who vote for these
members are as deeply divided by party, When socia l
scientists describe a trait among people-say, their
height- they usua lly note that there are a few very
short ones and a few very tall ones. but that most
people are in the middl e, They call this distribution
"unimodal. " But when one describes voting in Congress, except on matters of national urgency, the
votes are "bimoda l"-that is, a lmost a ll of the
Democrats vote one way and a lmost all of the Republicans vote a different way,
For exa mple. when President Clinton was
impeached , 98 percent of the House Republicans
voted for at least one of the four impeachm ent a rticles and 98 percent of the House Democrats voted
aga inst all four. and this happened despite the fact
that most Americans did not want to have the president impeached, In fact. the Republican vote did not
even match how people felt who lived in districts represented by Republicans, On abortion. most America ns favor it but with some important limitations.

The Organization of Congress: Parties

(ll1d

Caucuses

P.olarization in Congressional Voting. 1953-2002 (percentage of
votes)
Year

House

Senate

Year

House

Senate

1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977

52%
38
41
44
59
40
55
53
50
46
49
55
52
41
36
35
31

NA

1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

33%
47
38
37
36
56
47
61
57
64
47
55
49
55
64
65
62
73
56
50
56
47
43
40
43

45 %
47
46
48
43
44
40
50
52
41
42
35
54
49
53
67
52
69
62
50
56
63
49
55
45

27

38
27

42
29
48
36
42

47 %
30
53
36
44
48
37
62
41
47
36
42
50
35
32
36
35
42
36
40
44
48
37
42

Harold W Stanley and Richard G. Niemi, Vital Statistics on American Politics, 2003-2004 (Washington, D.C: Congressiona l Quarterly Press, 2003), table 5.7.

Source:

but in Congress Democrats almost always support it
with no restrictions and Republicans usually want to
put on lots of restrictions. Votes on less emotional
matters, like the tax bills, often show the same pattern of Democrats and Republicans at loggerheads.
How could these thin gs happen in a democratic
nation? If the American people are usually in the
center on po liti ca l iss ues. why are congressional
Democrats almost always liberal and congressional
Republicans almost always conser vative?
There is no simple or agreed-upon answer to this
question. Some scholars h ave argued that in the last
thirty years or so voters have in fact beco me more
partisan. "More partisan " means th at they see
important differences between the two parties, they
identify themselves as either conservatives or liberals, and they favor parties that share the ir ideological
preferences. 1 7
One reason this has happened has been the way
congressional districts are drawn for House members. The vast majority are draw n so as to protect one

party or the other. This means that if yo u are a
Republica n living in a pro-Democratic di strict (or a
Democrat li ving in a pro-Rep ublica n one), yo ur votes
don't make much difference in an election. Most
House districts are not com petitive, meaning that in
them the only election that co unts is the primary
used to pi ck a candidate. In primaries voter turnout
is lower. so that the most motivated (and thus most
ideological) voters play a disproportionate role in
choosing candid ates.
A second possibility is that the voters have become
more partisan as a result of Congress having become
more partisan. When House Democrats vote libera l
a nd House Republicans vote conservative, a lot of
voters follow this cue and take positions based on a
similar ideology. 18 People who don 't see the world
this way have either become less numero us or vote
less often.
And a third is the role of seniority. Even though
the so-called seniority rule is no longer strictly followed, the chairmen of committees a re typically the

339

340

Chapter 13

Congress

members who have been on those committees the
longest. and they will. of course. be ones from the
safest districts. Since the chairmen have a lot of influence over how bills are written. their views- which
have been shaped by a lifetime of dedication to Democratic or Republican causes- will be very important.
Still. just how much congressmen are influenced
by committee chairmen and other party leaders is
hard to know. In several sophisticated studies. political scientists Keith T Poole and Howard Rosentha l
have suggested that. while parties and their leaders
matter. individual members' ideological views (see
Chapter 7) probably matter as much or more than
party discipline does in explaining how Congress
works and how congressmen behave. "Members of
Congress. " they find . "come to Washington with a
staked-out position on the (liberal-conservative) continuum , and then. largely 'die with their ideological
boots on."·19 Everything from which "ideological
boots" a given member chooses to wear in the first
place to how he or she votes on a particular issue
"may result as much from external pressures of campaign donors and primary voters as from the internal
pressures of the congressional party."20
In short, party does make a difference in Congress-not as much as it once did. and not nearly as
much as it does in a parliamentary system. but
enough so that party affiliation is still the most
important thing to know about a member of Congress. Knowing whether a member is a Democrat or
a Republican will not tell you everything about the
member. but it will tell you more than any other single fact.

Caucuses
Congressiona l caucuses are a growing rival to the
parties as a source of policy leadership. A caucus is
an association of members of Congress created to
advocate a political ideology or a regional or economic interest. In 1959 there were only four caucuses; by the late 1980s there were over one hundred.
As Congress expert Susan Webb Hammond has
observed. "The pace of caucus formation accelerated
rapidly during the 1970s as members. operating

callclIs

An association of Congress mem bers
created to adva nce a pol it ical ideolog y o r a
regional, ethnic, or economi c inte rest.

with increased and more equ itab ly distributed
resources within a decentralized institution, sought
to respond to increased external demands . . .. Members derive benefits-gaining information. being
identified as a 'leader,' symbolically showing that
they care about an issue of importance to constituents- from caucus activities. "21 In January
1995, at the beginning of the Repub lican-led 104th
Congress. it was widely reported that the House of
Representatives would "abolish" congressional caucuses. Yet as of January 1996 there were 129 congressiona l caucuses- Ill from the l03rd Congress
and 18 new ones established by the 104th. What the
Republicans did do was to adopt a rule making the
operation of caucuses more difficult. All aides working on caucus matters must be housed in members'
offices. Therefore, a ides are often scattered among
several offices, and coordination becomes more difficult. Some caucuses responded by spinning off informational functions to new outside groups. Clearly
the death of the caucuses was greatly exaggerated.
The caucuses are alive. well. and changing. Hammond has identified six types. four of which are constituency-based (see Table 13.5). Intraparty caucuses
are formed by groups whose members share a similar
ideology; for example, the Democratic Study Group
was estab lished by liberal Democrats. Personal-interest caucuses form around a common interest in an
issue- for example, the environment. the arts, or
human rights. Constituency caucuses are established
to represent certain groups (African Americans.
women. Vietnam veterans). regions (New England.
the western states) . or both (in states or congressional districts with diffuse constituents, such as different
ethnic populations or family and corporate farms) .
One long-estab lished national constituency caucus is the Congressiona l Black Caucus (CBC). Fou nded in 1970. its members hi p increased fro m nine
members that year to forty in the 104th Congress.
Most CBC members have been libera l House Democrats. J. C. Watts, a black Republican from Oklahoma,
was elected in 1994 but refused to join the CBC. In
the Democratic-controlled 103rd Congress, CBC
members chaired three standing committees and
eighteen subcommittees.
But in the Republican-controlled 104th Congress,
CBC committee leaders became ranking minority
members, and some caucus Democrats lost their
seats on major House committees- Appropriations,
Ways and Means, and Rules. Moreover. the CBC grew

T1le Orgal1izatiol1 of COl1gress: Committees

Table 13.5

Congressional Caucuses

Type

Typical Examples

Intraparty

Class Clubs
The Coalition
Conservative Opportunity Society
Democratic Study Group
Tuesday Lunch Bunch
Wednesday Groups

Personal interest

Arts Caucuses
Constitutional Caucus
Constitutional Forum
Congressional Family Caucus
Human Rights Caucuses
Military Reform Caucus
Population and Development
Coalition
Senate Children'S Caucus

Constituency
concerns,
national

Congressiona l Black Caucus
Congressional Caucus for
Women 's Issues
Congressional Hispanic Caucus
Vietnam Veterans Caucus

Constituency
concerns,
regional

Congressional Border Caucus
Congressional Sun belt Council
Northeast-Midwest Congressional
Coalition
Tennessee Valley Authority Caucus
Western Caucus
Western States Senate Coalition

Constituency
concerns,
state/district

Congressional Caucus on
American Issues
Export Caucus
Irish Caucuses
Rural Caucus
Suburban Caucus
Task Force on Industrial
Innovation and Productivity

Constituency
concerns,
industry

Automotive Caucus
Boating Caucus
Depot Caucus
Steel Caucuses
Textile Caucus
Travel and Tourism Caucus

Source: Lawrence C. Dodd and Bruce I. Oppenheimer, eds., Congress Reconsidered, 6th ed. Washington, D.c.: Congressiona l
Quarterl y Press, 1997), table 12-1 by Susan Hammond.

less unified as liberal Democratic members from
northern districts were forced to share power with
more centrist members representing so uthern rural
and suburban districts.

Swearing-in ceremony Jor incoming chairman of the Congressional Black Ca ucus, Melvin Watt (D-NC) (cente r)
and incom ing vice-chair. Co rrine Brown (D-FL). Outgoing
chairman Elijah Cummi ngs (D-MD) is on the lejt (January
4, 2004, .1 09t17 Co ngress).

By co ntrast, other caucuses (and not only Republican ones), h ave fared better in recent years. For
exa mple, an intraparty caucus of "Blue Dog Democrats " known as the Coalition was born in February
1995 . The Coalition's two dozen moderate-toconservative members favor "middle-of-the-road "
policies, especially on welfare and budget issues. For
example, in 1995 the Coalition introdu ced its own
welfare and budget bills, and although neither proposal was enacted, certain provisions of each strongly influenced final House deliberations. As Hammond
has concluded. although the politica l fortunes of the
CBC, the Coalition. and other caucuses may change
from year to year. ca ucuses will continue and thrive
as congressiona l instituti ons "because they help
members to achieve perso nal goals of policy, representation. or power."22

'*

The Organization of
Congress: Committees
The most important organizational feature of Congress is the set of legislative committees of the House
and Senate. It is there that the real work of Congress is
done, and it is in the chairmanships of these committees and their subcommittees that most of the power
in Congress is found . The number and jurisdi ction of

341

342

Cl1apter 13

Congress

these committees are of the greatest interest to members of Congress, since decisions on these subjects
determine what group of members, with what political views, will pass on legisl ative proposa ls, oversee the
workings of agencies in the executive branch, a nd
conduct investigations.
There are three kinds of committees: standing
committees (more or less permanent bodies with
specified legislative responsibilities). select committees (groups appOinted for a limited purpose and
usually lasting for only a few congresses) . and joint
committees (those on which both representatives
and senators serve). An especially important kind
of joint committee is the conference committee,
made up of representatives and senators appointed to
reso lve differences in the Senate and House versions
of the sa me piece of legislation before final passage.
In the 104th Congress (1995-19 96) the new
Republican majority reduced the number of committees as part of its larger pla n to reform House operations. Simil ar efforts were made in the Senate. When
the du st settled on Ca pitol Hill. the total number of
House and Senate committees had fa ll en from 252 in
the previous Congress to 198 . a smaller total even
than the 242 committees of the 84th Congress
(1955-19 56). The House went from 22 to 19 standing committees and from 115 to 84 subcommittees
of standing committees. The Senate maintained 17
committees but reduced the number of subcommi ttees of standing committees from 86 to 68. By 2004
the number of House subcommittees had risen
sli ghtly to 88.
Though members of the majority party could, in
theory, occupy all of the seats on all of the committees, in practice they take the majority of seats on
each committee. name the chairman, and allow the

standing committees Permanently established
legislative committees that consider and are
responsible for legislation within a certain subject area .
select committees Congressional committees
appointed for a limited time and purpose .
joint committe e s Committees on which both
senators and representatives serve.
c onfe rence committees A joint committee
appointed to resolve differences in the Senate
and House versions of th e sa me bill.

minority party to have the other seats. Us ua lly the
ratio of Democrats to Repub lica ns on a committee
roughly corresponds to their ratio in that house of
Co ngress, but on occasion the majority party will try
to take extra seats on som e key panels, such as the
House Appropriations or Ways and Means Committees. Then the min ority party co mp lains, as th e
Republicans did in 1981 and the Democrats did in
1999. usua lly with little effect. In 2001, with the
Se n ate eve nly divided betwee n Democrats a nd
Republicans. each committee had the same number
of members from each party with Republicans servin g as chairmen.
Stand ing committees are the importan t ones.
beca use, with a few exceptions. they are the only
ones that can propose legislation by reporting a bill
out to the fu ll House or Senate. Each member of th e
House usu ally serves on two sta nding committees.
unless he or she is on an "excl usive" committeeAppropriations, Rules, or Ways and Means. In such a
case the representative is limited to one. Each senator
may serve on two "major" committees and one
"minor" committee.
When party leaders were stron g. as under Speakers Reed and Cannon, committee chairmen were
picked on the basis of loyalty to the leader. Now that
this leadership h as been weakened, seniority on
the comm ittee governs the selection of chairmen. Of
late, however, even seniority has been under attack.
In 1971 House Democrats decided in their caucus to
elect committee chairmen by secret ba llot. From then
through 1991 they used that procedure to remove
six co mmittee cha irmen. When the Republicans took
control of the House in 1995 . they could have
returned to the strict seniority rule. but they did not.
House Speaker Gingrich passed over three senior representatives in favor of more junior ones as committee chairmen. The Repub licans imposed six-year
term limits on House cha irmen. so in 2001, when
they organized the House, ma ny vetera n chairmen
were replaced with new leaders. For example, Henry
Hyde was replaced as chairman of the Judiciary
Committee by James Sensenbrenner.
Traditionally the committees of Cong ress were
dominated by the cha irmen. They often did their most
important work behind closed doors (though their
hea rings and reports were almost always published
in fu ll). In the early 1970s Congress further decentralized and democratized its operations by a series of

Th e Orgal1izatiol1 of COl1gress: Committees

changes that some members regarded as a "bill of
rights" for representatives and senators. especially
those with relatively little seniority. These chan ges
were by a nd large made by the Democratic Caucus,
bu t since the Democrats were in the majority, the
cha nges, in effect. became the rules of Congress. The
more important ones were as foll ows .
•

Caucus

House

• Committee chairmen to be elected by secret ballot
in par ty caucus
• No member to ch air more tha n one committee
• All committees with more tha n twenty members
to have at least four subcommittees (at the time,
Ways a nd Means had no subcommittees)
• Committee and personal staffs to be increased in
size
• Committee meetings to be public unless members
vote to close them
•

343

Senate

• Commi ttee meetings to be public unless members
vote to close them
• Committee chairmen to be selected by secret ballot at the request of one-fifth of the party caucus
• Committees to have la rger staffs
• No senator to ch air more than one committee
The effect of these cha nges, especially in the
House, was to give greater power to individual members a nd to lessen the power of party leaders a nd
committee chairmen. The decentralization of the
House meant that it was much harder for ch airmen
to block legislation they did not like or to discourage
junior members from pl ay in g a large role. Hou se
members were quick to take adva ntage of these
enl arged opportunities. In the 1980s they proposed
three times as ma ny a mendments to bills as they had
in the 1950s.23
There was a cost to be paid , however. for this
empowermen t of the members hi p. The 4 3 5 members of the House co uld not get much done if they all
ta lked as much as they liked and introduced as many
a mendments as th ey wished. And with the big
in crease in the number of subcom mittees, ma ny
subcommi ttee meetings were attended by (and thus
controlled by) only one person. the chairman. To
dea l with thi s. the Democratic leaders began recl aim-

A caucus is a closed meeting of the members of
a political party either to select a candidate for
office or to agree on a legislative position.
The term is from an American Indian word
meaning "elder" or "counselor." It quickly entered
political us age in the United States , there being a
Caucus Club in Boston as early as 1763.
The first national political caucuses were in
Congress, where legislators would gather to select
their party's candidate for president. Persons who
did not get a caucus endorsem ent soon began
denouncing the entire procedure, referring contemptuously to the "decrees of King Caucus." Pop ular resentment led in the 1830s to the creation of
the nominating convention as a way of choosing
presidential candidates.
Today congressional caucuses are organizations of legislators from a single p arty (Democrats or Republic ans) , with a common b ackground
(for example , women , Afric an Americ ans, His panics), sh aring a particular ideology (liberals or
conservatives), or h aving an interest in a single
issue (such as mushrooms , steel mills, or the
environmen t) .
Source: From Sajire's Political Dictionary by William Safire. Copyright © 1968, 1972, 1978 by William Sa fire. Reprinted by permission of Ra ndom Hou se, Inc. a nd the author.

in g some of their lost power. They made greater
use of restrictive rules that sha rply limi ted debate
an d the in troduction of amendments. Commi ttee

344

Ch apte r 13

Congress

HOW THINGS WORK

Standing Committees of the Senate
Major Committees

Minor Committees

No senator is supposed to serve on more than two
(but some do) .

No se nator is supposed t o serve on more than one
(but some do) .

Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
Appropriations
Armed Services
Banking, Hous ing, and Urban Affa irs
Budget
Commerce, Science, and Transpo rtatio n
Energy and Natural Resou rces
Env ironment and Public Works
Finance
Foreign Relations
Governmental Affai rs
Health, Education, Labor, a nd Pe nsions
Judiciary

Ru les and Adm inistrat ion
Small Business
Veterans' Affairs

chairmen began casting proxy votes. (A proxy is a
written authorization to cast another perso n's vote.)
In this way a chairman could control the results of
committee deliberations by casting the proxies of
absent members.
Repub lican House members were angered by all of
this. They suspected that restrictive rules and proxy
voting were designed to keep them from baving a ny
voice in House affairs. When they took control of the
House in 1995 , they announced some cbanges:
• They banned proxy voting.
• They limited committee and subcommittee cb a irmen 's tenures to tbree terms (six yea rs) and the
Speaker's to four terms (eight yea rs).
• They a llowed more freq uent 1100r debate under
open rules.
• They reduced the number of committees and
subcommittees.
• They autborized co mmittee cbairmen to bire
subcommittee staffs.
The endless arguments about rules illustrate a
fundamental problem that the House faces. Closed

Select Committees
Agin g
Eth ics
Indian Affairs
Inte ll igen ce

ru les. proxy voting, powerful committee chairm en,
a nd strong Speakers make it easier for business to
get done; tb ey put the House in a good barga ining
position with the pres ident and the Senate: and
they make it easier to reduce the number of specia linterest gro ups with legislative power. But this system also keeps individual members weak. The
opposite arrangements- ope n rules. weak chairmen , many subcommittees, meetings ope n to the
pub lic- be lp individual members be heard and
increase the amount of daylight sbining on congressional processes. But if everyon e is beard , no
one is heard, beca use tbe noise is deafening and the
speec hes end less. And though open meetings and
easy a mendin g processes may be intend ed to open
up the system to "the peop le. " the rea l beneficiaries
are the lobbyists.
The House Republican rules of 199 5 gave ba ck
so me power to the chairmen (for exa mpl e, by letting
them pick all staff members) but furth er reduced it in
other ways (for example, by imposing term limits and
ba nning proxy voting). The commitment to public
meetings remained.

The Organization of COl1gress: Staffs and Specialized Offices

345

HOW THINGS WORK

Standing Committees of the House
Exclusive Committees
Members may not serve on any other committee
except Budget.

Nonmajor Committees
Members may serve on one major and one non major
com m ittee, or on two nonmajor committees.

Appropriations
Rul es
Ways and Means

Budget
Governm ent Reform
House Administration
Resources
Science
Small Business
Standards of Official Conduct
Veterans' Affairs

Major Committees
Members may serve on only one major committee.
Ag riculture
Armed Services
Education and the Workforce
Energy and Com merce
Financial Services
Internationa l Relations
Judiciary
Transportation and Infrastructure

In the Senate there have been fewer changes, in
pa rt because individual members of the Senate have
always had more power than their counterparts in
the House. Two important changes were made by the
Repub lica ns in 1995 :
• A six-year term limit on all committee chairmen
(no limit on the majority leader's term)
• A requirement that committee members select
their chairmen by secret ba ll ot
Despite these new rules. the committees remain
the place where the real work of Congress is done.
The different types of committees tend to attract different kinds of members. Some, such as the committees that draft tax legislation (the Senate Finance
Committee and the House Ways and Means Committee) or that oversee fore ign a ffa irs (the Sen ate
Foreign Relations Committee a nd the Ho use International Relations Committee) are attractive to members who want to shape public policy, become experts
on important issues, or have influence with their colleagues. Others, such as the House and Senate com-

Note: In 1995 the House Republica n majority abolished three committees-District of Columbia. Post Office and Civil Service, and Merchant Marine and Fisheries-and gave t heir duties to other standing
committees.

mittees dealing with public lands, small business,
and veterans' affairs , are attractive to members who
want to serve particular constituents. 24

The Organization of Congress:
Staffs and Specialized Offices
In 1900 representatives had no personal staffs, and
senators averaged fewer than one staff member
each . As recently as 1935 the typical representative
had but two aid es. By 1998 the average representative had seventeen assistants and the average senator
over forty. To the more than ten thousand individuals
who served on the personal staffs of members of the
103rd Congress must be added three thousand more
who worked for congressional committees and yet
another three thousand employed by various congreSSional research agencies. Until the 199 Os
Congress had the most rapidly growing bureaucracy
in Washington- the personal staffs of legislators
increased more than fivefold [rom 1947 to 19 91,

346

Chapter 13

Figure 13.4

Congress

The Growth in Staffs of Members and
Committees in Congress, 1930-2002

8

-0
"'
c:

6

:JlOJ
o

:5

5

C1l
'"g;,

4

52

"-

E
C1l

'0

3

0;
.0

E
OJ

z

2

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Source: From Harold Stan ley and Richard Niemi. Vital Sta tistics on American Politics 2001 - 2002 (Washington. D.c.: Congressional Quarterly Press.
2001 ). Reprinted with permission.

then leveled off and declined slightly (see Figure
13.4). Though some staffers perform routine chores,
many help draft legislation , ha ndle co nstituents, and
otherwise shape policy a nd politics.

Tasks of Staff Members
Staff members assigned to a sen ator or representative spend most of th eir tim e serv icin g requests from
constituents- answering mail, ha ndling problems,
sending out newsletters, and meeting with voters. In
short, a major function of a member of Congress's
staff is to help co nstituents so lve problems and th ereby help that member get reelected. Indeed, over the
last two decades a larger and larger portion of congress iona l staffs-now about one-third-work in the
local (district or state) office of the member of Co ngress rather than in Was hington. Almost all members of Congress have such offices on a fu ll-time
basis; about half maintain two or more offices in
their constituencies. Some sc holars believe that thi s

growth in constituen cy-ser ving staffs helps explain
why it is so ha rd to defeat an incumbent representative or senator.
The legislative function of co ngress ional staff
members is also important. With each senator servin g on a n average of more tha n two committees and
seven subcommittees and each representative serving on an average of six committees a nd subcommi ttees , it is virtually imposs ib le for members
of Congress to become fa miliar in detail with all
the proposals that co me before them or to write all
the bills th at they feel ought to be introdu ced. As the
workload of Congress has grown (over six thousand
bills a re introdu ced, about six hundred public laws
are passed. a nd unco unted hearings and meetings
a re held during a typical Co ngress), the role of staff
members in dev ising proposa ls, negotiating agreements, organizin g hearings, writing questions for
members of Co ngress to ask of witnesses, draftin g
reports, a nd meeting with lobbyists and administrators has grown correspondingly.
Those who work for individual members of Congress. as opposed to committees, see themselves
enti rely as advocates for their bosses. As the mass
media have supplanted politica l parties as ways of
communicating with voters, the advocacy role of
staff members has led them to find and promote legislation for which a representa tive or se nator can
take credit. This is the entrepreneuri al function of
the staff. While it is sometimes performed under the
close super vision of the member of Congress, just as
often a staff member takes the ini tiati ve, find s a policy, and then "sells" it to his or her employer. Lobbyists a nd reporters und ersta nd thi s completely and
therefore spend a lot of time cultivating congressional staffers. both as so urces of information and as
co nsum ers of ideas.
One reason for the rapid growth in the size and
importa nce of congress ional staffs is that a large staff
creates co nditions that seem to require an even larger sta fr. As the staff grows in size. it generates more
legislative wo rk . Subcommittees proliferate to ha nd le
a ll th e issues with which legislators are concerned.
But as the workload increases, leg islators co mplain
that they cannot keep up and need more help.
The increased reliance on staff has ch a n ged
Congress, not because staffers do thin gs against the
wishes of their elected masters but beca use the stafr
has altered the environment within which Congress

How {/ Bill Becomes Law
does its work. In addition to their role as entrepreneurs promoting new po li cies, staffers act as negotiators. As a result members of Congress are more likely
to dea l with one another through staff intermediaries than personally. Co ngress has thereby become
less colleg ial. more ind ividua listi c, and less of a deliberative body. 2S

• Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) Established in 1972 to study a nd evaluate policies a nd
programs with a significa nt use of or impact on technology, the OTA had a staff of more than one hundred. Staff members looked into matters such as a
pl a n to build a pipeline to transport coa l slurry. The
agency had littl e impact a nd was abolished in 1995.

Staff Agencies

• Congressional Budget Office (CBO) Created in
1974, the CBO advises Congress on the likely economic effects of different spending programs and
provides information on the costs of proposed policies. This latter task h as been more useful to Congress than the more difficult job of estimating future
economic trends. The CBO prepares analyses of the
president's budget and economic projections that
often come to conclusions different from those of the
administration , thus giving members of Congress
arguments to use in the budget debates.

In addition to increas ing the number of staff members, Congress has also crea ted a set of staff agencies
that work for Congress as a whole. These staff agencies have come into being in large part to give Congress specialized knowledge equivalent to what the
presid ent has by virtue of his position as chief of the
executive branch.
• Congressional Research Service (CRS) Formerly
the Legislative Reference Service, the CRS is part of
the Library of Congress. Since 191 4 it has responded
to congress ional requests for information and now
employs nearly nine hundred peop le, many with
adva nced academic training, to respond to more
than a quarter of a milli on questions each year. As a
politically neutral body, it does not recommend policy, but it will look up fa cts and indicate the arguments for a nd aga inst a proposed po licy. CRS also
keeps track of the status of every major bill before
Congress and produces a summary of each bill introduced. This information is instantly availab le to legislators via computer terminals located in almost all
Senate a nd most House offices.
• General Accounting Office (GAO) Created in
1921 , this agency once performed primarily routine
financial audits of the money spent by executivebranch departments. Today it also investigates agencies and policies and makes recommendations on
almost every aspect of government- defense contracting, drug enforcement policies, the domestic
security investigations of the FBI, Medicare and Medicaid programs, water pollution programs, and so
forth. Though the head of the GAO- the comptroll er
genera l- is appointed by the president (w ith th e consent of the Senate), he or she ser ves for a nfteen-year
term and is very much the servant of Congress
rather than of the pres ident. The GAO employs about
five thousa nd people. many of whom are permanently assigned to work with various co ngressional
committees.

*

How a Bill Becomes Law

Some bills zip through Congress; others make their
way slowly a nd painfully. Cong ress, a n English
observer once remarked. is li ke a crowd. moving
either sluggishly or with great speed.
Bill s that have sped through on the fast track
include ones to reduce drug abuse, reform Defense
Department procurement procedures. end the mandatory retirement age, and help the disabled. Those
that have plodded through on the slow track include
ones dea lin g with health care, tax laws, energy conservation , and foreign trade, as well as several appropriations bills.
Why the differen ce? Studying the list above gives
some clues. Bills to spend a lot of money move slowly, especially during times (such as the 1980s and
ea rly 2000s) when the government is runn ing up
big deficits. Bills to tax or regulate businesses move
slowly because so many different interests have to be
hea rd and accommodated. On the other hand. bills
that seem to embody a cl ear, appealing idea ("stop
drugs ," "help old folks," "end sca nda l") gather
momentum quickly, especially if the government
doesn't have to spend a lot of its money (as opposed
to requiring other people to spend their money) on
the idea.
In the following account of how a bil l becomes law.
keep in mind the central fact that the complexity of

347

348

Chapter 13

Congress

HOW THINGS WORK
How a Bill Becomes Law
INTRODUCTION
Draft and Introduce You do not need to be a member of Congress to draft a bill; lobbyists, congressional staff, and others draft legislation all the time. But
you do need to be a member of Congress to introduce legislation. The bill or resolution gets a number
preceded by H.R. for House bills and s. for Senate
bills.
Refer to Committee Numbered bills get referred to
standing committees depend ing on their content
and in accordance with detailed rules and procedures
that differ somewhat between the House and the
Senate. Once referred, the bill gets on the committee's calendar for review by a subcommittee or by
the full committee .
COMMITTEE ACTION
Get Committee Action Not every bill on the calendar
gets action . Many bills get referred to subcommittees
for staff analysis and hearings held in public. But getting a hearing is not the same thing as getting
action . Even after study, hearings, and other consideration of the bill, if the committee fails to act, the
bill is dead.
Go to Mark Up If, however, the committee so chooses, the bill then goes to "mark up, " a process that
normally works by subcommittee members and staff
editing or amending the bill, often extensively. But
even after "the mark," the subcommittee may decide
not to recommend the bill to the full committee, and
the bill dies there .
Order the Bill Once the full committee gets the bill,
it mayor may not conduct more analysis and hold
more hearings on the legislation, consider amendments thereto, and vote its recommendation to the
House or Senate (a procedure called " ordering the
bill" or "ordering the bill reported " ). If the bill is
ordered, it still has a chance; if not, it is dead.
Publish a Report The committee chairman orders a
public report on the bill . Most such reports are prepared by committee staff and describe the nature
and purpose of the bill; what various experts have
said or testified concerning it; what, if any, position

the pres ident has taken on it; what, if any, public
comments the relevant cab inet agencies or other
executive branch units have offered on it; and what
dissenting membe rs of the committee have to say
about it .
FLOOR ACTION AND CONFERENCE ACTION
Get a Date The bill goes back to the chamber that
originated it and is scheduled for floor debate and a
vote. The House has many different scheduling procedures or "calendars," while the Senate has but
one. Even having come this far, the bill might or
might not get a date, or come up in an order that
makes it likely to keep going .
Win Two Chambers The debate over the bill and any
amendments having concluded, the members vote. If
the bill is defeated, it is dead . If the bill is approved,
it next goes to the other chamber, which begins the
process again, starting with the bill being referred to
committee . Anything can happen. The second chamber can accept the bill as is, change it, or never even
consider it. The bill can go back to the first chamber
with few or no changes, go to a "conference comm ittee" to reconcile any significant differences
between the two versions of the bill, or go nowhere.
If the two chambers agree, a conference report on
the final bill is prepared . Only if the two chambers
approve exactly the same final bill w ith identical language does the bill get sent to the president for
consideration.
PRESIDENT
Get President's Signature If the president signs the
bill, it becomes law. If the president takes no action
for ten days after receiving the bill, and Congress is
still in session, the bill becomes law. If the president
takes no action after the Congress has adjourned,
the b ill dies from his "pocket veto." Or, the president
can veto the b ill outright, in which case it goes back
to Congress.
Override President's Veto If the president vetoes a
bill, Congress can still turn it into law, but that
requires a two-thirds vote of the members, and there
must be enough members present to fo rm a quorum.

How a

HOUSE

Bill Becomes Law

349

SENATE

INTRODUCTI ON

INTRODUCTION

HRl Introduced in House

S 2 Introdu ced in Senate

l

I

COMM ITTEE ACTION

COMM ITTEE ACTION
Referred to House committee

Referred to Senate committee

Referred to subcommi ttee

Reported by full committee

Rules committee action

FLOOR ACTION
House debate, vote on passage

I

l

FLOOR ACTION
Senate debate, vote on passage

CO NFERENCE ACT ION

HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATI VES

...

Once both chambers have passed re lated bill s,
a conference committee of members from both
houses is formed to work out differences.
Compromise version from conference is sent
to eac h chamber for final approval.

PRESID ENT
Compromise version approved by both houses
is sent to president who can either sign it into
law or ve to it and return it to Congress. Congress
may overr ide ve to by two-thirds majority vote in
both houses; bill then becomes law withou t
president's signature .

SENATE

I

3 50

Chapter 13

Congress

these procedures ordinarily gives a powerful advantage to the opposition. There are many points at
which action can be blocked. This does not mean that
nothing gets done but that, to get something done, a
member of Congress mu st either assemble a majority
coalition slowly and painstakingly or take adva ntage
of temporary enthusiasm for some new cause that
sweeps away the normal obstacles.

Introducing a Bill
Any member of Congress may in trod uce a bill- in
the House simply by handing it to a clerk or dropping
it in a box (the "hopper"), in the Senate by being recognized by the presidin g offi cer and a nn ouncing the
bill's introduction. Bills are numbered and sent to the
printer: a House bill bears the prefix R.R., a Senate
bill the prefix S. A bill can be either a public bill
(perta ining to public affairs generally) or a p r ivate
bill (perta ining to a particular individua l. such as a
person pressing a financial cla im aga in st the government or seeking specia l permission to become a
natura lized citizen). Private bills were once very
numerous; today ma ny such matters have been delegated to administrative agencies or the courts. If a
bill is not passed by both houses and signed by the
president within the life of one Congress, it is dead
and must be reintroduced during the next Congress.
Pending legislation does not carryover from one
Congress to the next. (A new Congress is organized
every two years.)
We often hear that legislation is in itiated by the
president a nd enacted by Congress- the former pro-

public bill

A legislative bill that deals with
matters of general concern.
private bill A legislative bill that deals only
with specific, private, personal, or local matters.

simple resolution

An expression of op inion
either in the House or Senate to settle procedural matters in either body.
concurre nt r esolution An expression of opinion without the force of law that requires the
approval of both the House and the Senate,
but not the president.
joint resolution A formal expression of con gressi o nal opinio n th at must be approved by
both houses of Co ngress and by the president;
constitut ional amendm ents need not be sig ned
by t he president .

poses, the latter disposes. The reality is more complicated. Co ngress frequently initiates legislation; in fact
most of the consumer and environmental protection
legislation passed since 1966 began in Congress, not
in the executive branch. An d even laws form a lly proposed by the president often represent presidenti al
versions of proposa ls that have incubated in Congress. This was the case, for example, with some civil
rights laws and with the proposa l that eventua lly
became Med icare. Even wh en the president is the
principal author of a bill , he usually submits it (if he
is prudent) only after carefu l consultation with key
congressional leaders. In a ny case the president cannot himself introduce legislation: he must get a member of Congress to do it for him.
On e study showed that of ninety major laws
passed between 1880 and 1945, seventy-seven were
introduced w ithout presidential sponsorsh ip. In
shapin g the fin a l contents, congressiona l influence
dominated in thirty-five cases, pres idential influence
domin ated in nineteen, and influ ence was mixed in
the rema ining thirty-six. Another study, covering the
period 1940 to 196 7, found that Congress was the
major contributor to the contents of about ha lf of all
laws passed. 2 h
In addition to bills, Co ngress can pass resolution s.
A simple resolution (passed by either the House or
the Senate) is used for matters such as establishing
the rules und er which each body will operate. A conc urren t resolution settles housekeeping and procedura l matters that affect both hou ses. Simple an d
concurrent reso lutions are not signed by the presiden t and do not have the force of law. A joint r esolution requires the approval of both hou ses and the
signature of the president; it is essentia lly the same
as a law. A joint resolution is a lso u sed to propose a
constitutional amendment; in this case it must be
approved by a two-thirds vote of both houses, but it
does not require the signature of the presi dent.

Study by Committees
A bill is referred to a committee for consideration by
either the Speaker of the House or the presiding officer
of the Senate. Rules govern which committee will get
which bill, bu t sometimes a choice is possible. In the
House the right of the Speaker to make such choices is
a n importa nt component of his powers. (His decisions
can be appea led to the fu ll House.) In 1963 a civil
rights bill was referred by the presiding officer of the
Senate to the Commerce Committee in order to keep it

How a Bill Becomes Law

H.R.1661
Children 's Health Insurance Accou ntability Act of J999 (Introduced in the House)
HR 166 1 IH

1061h CONGRESS
1st Session

H . R. 1661

To amc.nd tit le XXV II af lhe Public Health Service Act and pro17 of subtitle B of title I of \.he Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 to establish
standards for lhc health quality improvement of chi ldren in managed carl! plans and other health plans.

IN THE HO USE OF REPRESENTATIVES

May 4, 1999
Mrs. MORELLA (for herself, Mr. BALDACCI. Mr. SAWYER. and Mr. HILLIARD) introduced the following bi ll ; which was referred to the Committee on
Commerce , and in addition to the Committee on Education:md the Workforce, for a period to be subsequent.!)' determined by the Speaker. in each case for
ron~ ldcra lion of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the commiuee concerned

A BILL
To amend utle XXV II of the Public Heahh Service ACland part 7 of subtitle B of ulle I oflhc: Employee Reuremcnl lncome Security Act of 1974 to establish
standards for the health quality improvement of children in managed care plans and other health plans.

Be It enacted by the Senate and House of RepreSelllalives of lhe V llileli Stale., of Amerka ill C(mgren (Is.ftmbled,

A bill (H.R. 1661) as it looks when introduced in the Hou se.

out of the hands of the chairman of the Judiciary
Committee, who was hostile to the bill. In the House
the same piece of legislation was referred by the
Speaker to the judiciary Committee in order to keep it
out of the grasp of the hostile chairman of the Interstate and Foreign Commerce Committee.
The Constitution requires that "all bills for raising
revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives." The Senate can and does amend such bills, but
only after the House has acted first. Bills that are not
for raising revenue- that is. bills that do not change
the tax laws-can originate in either house. In practice the House also originates appropriations billsthat is. bills directing how money shall be spent.
Because of the House 's special position in relation to
revenue legislation, the committee that handles
those bills- the Ways and Means Committee-is
particularly powerful.
Most bills die in committee. They are often introduced only to get publicity for the member of Congress or to enable the member to say to constituents
or press ure groups that he or she "did something" on
a matter concerning them. Bil ls of general interestmany of which are drafted in the executive branch
but introduced by a member of Congress- are
assigned to a subcommittee for a hearing , where witnesses appear. evidence is taken, and questions are
asked. These hearings are used to inform members of
Congress. to permit interest groups to speak out
(whether or not they have anything helpful to say),

and to build public support for a measure favored by
the majority of the committee.
Though committee hearings are necessary and
valuable. they also fragment the process of considering bills dealing with complex matters. Both power
and information are dispersed in Congress, and thus
it is difficult to take a comprehensive view of matters
cutting across committee boundaries.
To deal with this problem Congress has established a process whereby a bill may now be referred
to several committees that simultaneously consider it
in whole or in part. This process, called multiple
referra l, was used in 19 77 to send President
Carter's energy proposals to six different committees
in both the House and Senate. An even bigger multiple referral was used for the 1988 trade bill, which
was considered by fourteen committees in the House
and nine in the Senate. The advantage of this procedure is that all views have a chan ce to be heard; the
disadvantage is that it takes a lot of time and gives
opponents a greater chance to ki ll or modify the bill.
And if the different committees disagree about the
bill, their mem bers have to come together in a gargantuan joint meeting to iron out their differences.

multiple refe rral

A congressional process
w hereby a bill may be referred t o several
comm ittees.

3 51

352

Chapter 13

Congress

HOW THINGS WORK

Congressional Calendars
House
Union Calendar

Bills to raise revenue or spend money
Example: an appropriations bill
House Calendar Nonmoney bills of major importance
Example: a civil rights bill
Private Calendar Private bills
Example: a bill to waive the imm igration laws so
that a Philadelphia woman could be joined by her
Italian husband

In these cases the adva n tages of the co mmittee system-providing ex pert know ledge and careful deliberation-are often lost. Before the practice was
aboli shed in 19 95. abou t a quarter of a ll House bills
and resolutions went through multiple referrals.
Under the new rules. t he Speaker is allowed to send a
bill to a second committee a fter the Ilrst is finished
acting. or he may refer parts of a bill to separate comm ittees. This process, ca ll ed s equential referral,
has not noticeably slowed down the pace of legislative activity in Congress. In the 108th Congress.
House ru les were cha nged to give t he Speaker,
"under exceptional circumstances the right to not
designate a primary committee." It is still too soo n to
know what. if any, difference this cha nge will make.
After the hearings the committee or subcommittee will "mark up " the bill- that is, make revisions
and additions, some of wh ich are extensive. These
cha nges do not become part of the bill unless they
are approved by the house of which the co mmittee is

sequential referral A congressional process by
which a Speaker may send a bill to a second
committee after the first is finished acting .
discharge petition A device by which any
member of the House, after a committee has
had the bill for thirty days, may petition to
have it brought to the floor.
closed rule An order from the House Rules
Committee that sets a time limit on debate;
forbids a bill from be ing amended on the
floor.

Noncontroversial bills
Example: a resolution creating National Stenographers Week
Discharge Calendar Discharge petitions
Consent Calendar

Senate
Executive Calendar

Presidential nominations, pro-

posed treaties
Calendar of Business

All legislation

a part. If a majority of the committee votes to report
a bill out to the House or Senate. it goes forward . It is
acco mpanied by a report that explains why the comm ittee favors the bill a nd why it w ishes to see its
a men dments. if any. adopted. Committee mem bers
who oppose the bill have an opportu nity to include
their dissenting opinions in the report.
If the committee does not report th e bill ou t favorably. that ord inarily kills it. There is a procedure
whereby the full House or Senate ca n get a bill that is
sta lled in committee out and on to t he Ooor, bu t it is
rarely used. In the House a dis charge petition
must be signed by 2 18 members; if the petition is
a pproved by a vote of the House. the bill comes before
it directly. In the Sen ate a member can move to discharge a comm ittee of any bi ll , and if the motion
passes, the bill comes before the Senate. During the
last century there have been over eight hundred
effo rts in the House to use discharge petitions; only
two dozen have succeeded. Discharge is ra rely tried
in th e Senate, in part because Senate rul es permit
a lmost any proposa l to get to the fl oor as a n amendment to another bill.
Por a bi ll to come before either house. it must Ilrst
be placed on a calend ar. There are fi ve su ch ca lendars in the House and two in the Senate (see the box
above).
Though the bill goes onto a ca lendar, it is not necessarily considered in chronologica l order or even considered at a ll. In the Hou se. the Rules Committee
reviews most bills and adopts a rul e that governs the
procedures under which they will be considered by the
House. A closed rule sets a strict time li mit on debate

How a Bill Becomes Law
and forbids the introduction of any amendments from
the Ooor. or forbids amendments except those offered
by the sponsoring committee. Obviously such a rule
ca n make it very difficult fo r opponents to do anything
but vote yes or no on the measure. An open rule permits amendments from the Ooor. A restrictive rule
permits some amendments but not others.
In the early 1970s most bills were debated under
open ru les. In the 198 0s the Ru les Committeewhich is controlled by the Spea ker- increasingly
introduced bills for consideration under closed or
restrictive rules in an effort to reduce the number of
amendments from the 1100r (and. the Republicans
argued. to reduce Republican influence) . By the end
of the 1980s roughly half of all bills. and nearly
three-fourths of all important ones. were debated
under restrictive or closed rules. In 199 2 only onethird of all bills were considered under an open
rule. 27 In 1995 the Republicans allowed more debate
under open rul es.
The House has at least three ways of bypassing the
Rules Committee: (1 ) a member ca n move that the
rules be suspended. which requires a two-thirds vote;
(2) a discharge petition. as explained above. can be
fil ed; or (3) the House can use the "Calend ar Wednesday" procedure.* These methods are not used very
often. but they are available if the Rules Committee
departs too far from the sentiments of the House.
In theory. few such barriers to floor consideration
exist in the Senate. There bills may be considered in
any order at any time whenever a majority of the
Senate chooses. The majority leader. in consultation
with the minority leader. schedules bills for consideration. In practice. however. getting proposals to the
Senate floor is far more complicated. Whereas the
House normally plows through its legislative schedule. ignoring individual members' complaints in favor
of getting its work done. the Senate majority leader
must accommodate the interests of individual senators before proceeding with the Senate's business.

* On Wednesdays the list of committees of the House is
ca lled more or less in alpha betica l order, and any committee can bri ng up for action a bill of its own alrea dy on a
ca lendar. Action on a bi ll broug ht to the fl oor on Calendar
Wednesday must be completed that day, or t he bill goes
back to comm ittee. Since major bills ra rely can be voted on
in one day, thi s procedure is not often used.

Floor Debate-The House
Once on the fl oor. the bills are debated. In the House
all revenu e and most other bills are discussed by the
"Committee of the Whole." which is nothing more
than whoever happens to be on the fl oor at the time.
The quorum , or minimum number of members
who must be present for business to be conducted. is
only 100 members for the Committee of the Whole.
Obviously thi s number is easier to assemble than a
quorum for the House itself. which the Constitu tion
specifies as a majority. or 218 members. The Speaker
does not preside but chooses another person to wield
the gavel. The Committee of the Whole debates.
amends. and generally decides the final shape of the
bill. but technically cannot pass it. To do that the
Committee of the Whole reports the bill back to the
House (that is. to itself) . which takes final action .
During the debate in the Committee of the Whole.
the committee sponsoring the bill guides the discussion. divides the time equally between proponents
and opponents. and decides how lon g each member
will be perm itted to speak. If amend ments are
allowed under the rule. they must be germane to the
purpose of the bill-extraneous matters (riders) are
not allowed-and no one may speak for more than
(lve minutes on an amendment. During this process
people wishing to take time out to hudd le about strategy or to delay action can demand a quorum calia ca lling of the roll to find out whether the necessary
minimum number of members are present. If a quorum is not present. the House must either adjourn or
dispatch the sergeant at arms to round up missing

open rule

An order from the House Rules
Committee that permits a bill to be amended
on the floor.
restrictive rule An order from the House
Rules Committee that permits certain kinds of
amendments but not others to be made into a
bill on the floor.
quorum The minimum number of members
who must be present for business to be con ducted in Congress .
quorum call A roll call in either house of Congress to see whether the minimum number of
representatives required to conduct business is
present.

353

35 4

Chapter 13

Congress

Riders and Christmas Trees

members. The sponsorin g co mmittee almost always
wins: its bill . as a mended by it. usually is the version
that the Ho use passes.

Floor Debate- The Senate

A rider is a provision added to a piece of legislation that is not germane to the bill's purpose. The
goal is usually to achieve one of two outcomes:
either to get the president (or governor) to sign an
otherwise objectionable bill by attaching to it , as
an amendment, a provision that the chief executive desperately w ants to see en acted, or to get
the president to veto a bill that h e would otherwise sign by attaching to it, as an amendment,
a provision that the chief executive strongly
dislikes.
A rider is a convenient way for a legislator to
get a pet project approved th at might not be
approved if it had to be voted on by itself. The
term can be traced b ack to seventeenth-century
England.
When a bill has lots of riders, it becomes a
Christmas tree bill. In 1966, for example, the Foreign Investors Act, a bill designed to solve the balance-of-paym ents problem, had added to it riders
giving assist ance to hearse owners, the m ineral
ore business, importers of scotch whiskey, and
presidential candidates .
Source: From Safire's Political Dictionary by William Sa fire. Copyright © 1968, 1972, 1978 by William Safire. Reprinted by permission of Random House, Inc. and the author.

cloture rule A rule used by the Senate to end
or limit debate .

Things are a good deal more casual in the Senate.
Shor t of cloture (discussed below), there is no rule
limiting debate. a nd members ca n speak for as long
as they ca n stay on their feet. A senator's remarks
need not be relevant to the matter under consideration (some sen ators have read aloud from the Washington telephone directory). a nd a nyone can offer an
a mendment at any time. There is no Committee of
the Whole. Amendments need not be germane to the
purpose of the bill, and thus the Senate often attaches riders to bills.
In fact , the opportunity to offer non germane
a mendments gives a sen ator a chance to get a bi ll
onto the Ooor with out rega rd to the calendar or the
sc hedul e of the majori ty leader: he or she need only
offer a pet bill as an Hamendment" to a bill already
under discussion. (This ca nnot be done to a n appropri ations bill. ) Indeed. the entire committee hea ring
process ca n be bypassed in the Senate if the House
has a lrea dy passed the bi ll . In th at case a senator can
get the House-passed measure put directly onto the
Se nate ca lend a r without co mmittee action. In 1957
a nd again in 1964 this was done wi th House-passed
civil rights bills to make cer ta in that they wou ld not
be bottl ed up in the co nserva tive Senate Judiciary
Commi ttee.
A Senate filibuster is difficult to break. The current cloture rule requires that sixteen senators sign
a petition to move cloture. The motion is voted on
two days after the petition is introduced; to pass,
three-fifths of the entire Senate membership (sixty
se nators if there are no vacancies) must vote for it. If
it passes. each senator is therea fter limited to one
hour of debate on the bill und er co nsideration. The
tota l debate, includin g roll ca ll s and the introduction
of a mendments. cannot exceed one hundred hours.
In recent years both fi libu sters a nd cl oture votes
have become more common . The fi libuster occurs
more freq uently beca use it is now easier to stage one.
Often it consists not of a senator's making a long
speech but of end less requests for the clerk to call the
ro ll . More fi li bu sters mea ns more cl oture votes,
which a re now eas ier to win since the 197 5 cha nge
lower ing the req uired number of supporters from

How a Bill Becomes Law
two-thirds to three-fifths of all senators. During the
100th Con gress (19 87- 1988) there were a lmost as
ma ny cloture votes-for ty-three- as there had been
in the half century after the procedure was invented.
Since 1975 about 40 percent of all cloture votes
have succeeded in cutting off debate.
Co nservatives have used the filibuster to try to
block civil rights laws; liberals have used it to try to
block decontrol of gas prices. Since both fa ctions
have found the filibuster useful. it seems most unlikely that it will ever be abolished, though it h as been
somewhat curtailed. One way to keep the Senate going
during a fi libuster is throu gh double-tracking,
whereby the disputed bill is shelved temporarily so
that the Senate ca n get on with other business.
Because doub le-trackin g permits the Senate to discuss and vote on matters other than the bill that is
being filibustered, it is less costly to individual senators to stage a filibuster. In the past, before doubletracking. a senator and his all ies had to keep talking
around the clock to keep their filibuster alive. If they
stopped talking, the Senate was free to ta ke up other
business. Opponents of the filibu ster wou ld bring
cots a nd blankets to the Senate so that they could
sleep a nd eat there, ready to take the floor the
moment th e fili buster faltered. But with doub letracking other busin ess can go on while the stalled
bi ll is temporarily set aside. As a result the number of
filibu sters has skyrocketed. In the word s of two
expert Senate watchers, the "Senate has become
increas in gly unma n ageable as filibusters have
become virtually commonplace on both major and
min or pi eces of legislation , ra isin g the sta nd ard for
passage of even routine bills from fifty to sixty votes
a nd resulting in frequent delays in scheduling, stopand -go patterns of floor debate," a nd the use of other
procedures "that make the instituti on hostage to the
whims of individual senators."28
What the threat of a filibuster mea ns in practice is
this; neither political party can co ntrol the Senate
unless it has at least sixty votes. Neither pa rty h as
had th at many Sen ate seats sin ce 1979 , and so fo r
the Senate to act there must be a bipa rtisan majority.

Methods of Voting
Some observers of Congress make the mistake of
dec iding who was for and who was against a bill by
the final vote. This can be misleading- often a member of Congress will vote [or fina l passage of a bill
after hav ing supported amendmICnts that, if they had

passed, wo uld have made the bi ll tota lly different. To
keep track of various members' voting records,
therefore, it is often more important to know how
they voted on key amendments than to know how
they voted on the bill itself.
Find ing that ou t is not always easy, though it has
beco me more so in recent years. There are four procedures for voting in the House. A voice vo te co nsists of the members' shouting "yea" or "nay"; a
division (or sta nding) vote involves the members'
standing a nd being counted. In neither a voice nor a
sta nding vote a re the names of members recorded as
having voted one way or the other.
To learn how a n individual votes there must be
either a recorded teller vote or a roll ca ll . In a teller
vote the members pass between two tellers, the yeas
fir st and then the nays . Since 1971 a tell er vote can
be "recorded," which means that, at the request of
twenty members. clerks write dow n the names of
those favoring or opposing a bill as they pass the
tellers. Since tell er votes but not ro ll calls may be
taken in the Committee of the Whole, the use of a
recorded teller vote enables obser vers to find out how
members voted in those impor ta nt deliberations.
A roll-call vot e, of course, consists of people
a nswering "yea" or "nay" to their names. It can be
done at the request of one-fifth of the representatives
present in the House. When roll calls were handled
ora lly, it was a time-consuming process, since th e
clerk had to drone through 43 5 names. Since 1973 an
electron ic voting system has been in operation th at
permits each member, by inserting a plastic card into

double-trclcking

A procedure to keep the
Senate going during a filibuster in which the
disputed bill is shelved temporarily so that
the Senate can get on with other business.
voice vote A congressional voting procedure
in whi ch members shout " yea" in approval or
"nay" in d isapproval, permitting members to
vote quickl y o r anonymously on bills.
division vote A congressional vot ing procedure in which members stand and are counted .
telle r vote A congressi onal voting proce dure
in w hich members pass between t w o tell ers,
th e " yeas" first and the "nays" second.
roll-call vote

A congressional voting procedu re that consists of members answe ring
" yea" or "nay" to the ir nam es.

355

356

Ch apter 13

Congress

HOW THINGS WORK

House-Senate Differences: A Summary
House

Senate

435 members serve two-year terms .
House members have o nly one major committee
assignment, thus tend to be policy spec ialists.
Speaker's referral of bills to committee is hard to
challenge .
Committees almost always consider legislation first.
Scheduling and rules are controlled by the majority
party.
Rules Committee is powerful ; controls time of
debate, admissibility of amendments.
Debate is usually limited to one hour.

100 members serve rotating six-year terms.
Senators have two or more major committee assignments, thus tend to be policy generalists.
Referral decisions are easy to challenge.

Nongermane amendments may not be introduced
from the floo r.

a slot, to record his or her own vote and to learn the
total automatically. Owing to the use of recorded
teller votes and the advent of electronic ro ll-call votes,
the number of recorded votes has gone up sharply in
the House. There were only seventy-three House roll
calls in 1955; twenty years later there were over eight
times th at many. Voting in the Senate is much the
same, only simpler: there is no such thing as a teller
vote, and no electronic counters are used.
If a bill passes the House and Senate in different
for ms, the differences must be reconciled if the bill is to
become law. If they are minor, the last house to act may
simply refer the bill back to the other house, which then
accepts the alterations. If the differences are major, it is
often necessary to appoint a conference committee to
iron them out. Only a minority of bills require a conference. Each house must vote to form such a committee.
The members are picked by the chairmen of the House
and Senate standing committees that have been handling the legislation, with representation given to the
minority as well as the majority party. There are usually between three and fIfteen members from each house.
No decision can be made unless approved by a majority of both delegations.
Bargaining is long and hard; in the past it was also
secret. Now some conference sess ions are open to the

Committee consideration is easily bypassed.
Scheduling and rules are generally agreed to by
majority and minority leaders.
Rules Committee is weak; few limits on debate or
amendments.
Debate is unlimited unless shortened by unanimous
consent or by invoking cloture .
Nongermane amendments may be introduced .

public. Often-as with Presiden t Carter's energy
bill-the legislation is substantially rewritten in conference. Complex bills can lead to enormous conference committees. The 1988 trade bill went before a
conference committee of two h undred members.
Theoretically the conferees are not supposed to
change anything already agreed to by both the
House and Senate, but in the inevitable give-andtake even matters already approved may be changed.
In most cases the conference reports tend to favor,
slightly, the Senate version of the bill. Several studies

Should We Have a B'
Congress?
Igger
November 15
WASHINGTON

A POwerful citizens or ani

.

that the House of R
g zatlOn has demanded
th t
epresentatives b d
a voters can feel closer to tl'
e ma e larger so

>

_uJ.

resentative now speak fI lelr members. Each rep
far too many, the <>rou s or about 600,000 peop/~
P
all points of view~o b ~rgues, to make it Possible for
e eard. In Its petition ...

II r(
•
I
~ ~ I

F-"'-M
- E- M
- O- R-A- N
- D- U
- M- - - - - - - - - - '

........

_111111111111.~~._

To: Representative Peter Skerry
From: Martha Bayles, legislative aide

Subject: The Size of the House of Representatives
The House can decide how big it wishes to be. When it was created, there was one
representative for every 30,000 people . Now there is one for every 600,000. In most
other democracies each member of parliament represents far fewer than 600,000
people . Doubling the size of the House may be a way of avoiding term limits.
Arguments for:
1. Doubling the size of the House would reduce the huge demand for constituent
services each member now faces.
2. A bigger House would represent more shades of opinion more fairly.
3. Each member could raise less campaign money because his or her campaign would
be smaller.
Arguments against:
1. A bigger House would be twice as hard to manage, and it would take even longer
to pass legislation.
2. Campaigns in districts of 300,000 people would cost as much as ones in districts with
600,000 people .
3. Interest groups do a better job of representing public opinion than would a House
with more members.
Your decision:
Increase size of House _ _ __
Do not increase size of House _ __

3 58

Chapter 13

Congress

have suggested that the Senate wins in 57 to 65 percent of cases. 29 Whoever wins (and both sides
always claim that they got everything out of the barga ining that they possibly cou ld have), conferees
report their agreement back to their respective houses, which usually consider the report immed iately.
The report can be accepted or rejected; it cannot be
amended . In the great majority of cases it is accepted: the alternative is to have no bill at all, at least for
that Congress. The bill, now in fInal form, goes to the
president for signature or veto. If a veto is cast, the
bill returns to the house of origin. There an effort can
be made to overrid e the veto. Th is req uires th at twothirds of those present (provided that there is a quorum) must vote to override; this vote must be a roll
ca ll. If both houses override in this manner, the bill
becomes law without the president's approval.

Reducing Power and Perks
While most citizens are only vaguely familiar with
the rules and procedures under which Congress
operates. they do care whether Congress as an institution serves the public interest and fu lfills its mission as a democratic body. Over the last several
decades, many proposals have been made to reform
and improve Congress- term limitations, new ethics
and campaign finance laws, and organizational
changes intended to reduce the power and perks of
members while making it easier for Congress to pass
needed legislation in a timely fashion. Some of these
proposals-for example, campaign finance reforms
(see Chapter 10)- have recently become law.
Many would-be reformers share the view that Congress is overstaffed and self-indulgent. It is, they complain. quick to impose new laws on states, cities,
businesses, and average citizens but slow to apply
those same laws to itself and its members. It is quick to
pass pork-barrel legislation- bil ls that give tangi-

pork-barrel legislation

Leg islation that gives
tangible benefits to constituents in several districts or states in the hope of winning their
votes in return.
franking privilege The ability of members to
mail letters to their constituents free of charge
by substituting their f acsimile signature f o r
postage.

ble benefits (highways, dams, post omces) to constituents in the hope of winning their votes in
return-but slow to tackle complex and controversial
questions of national policy. The reformers' image of
Congress is unflattering, but is it wholly unwarranted ?
No perk is more treasured by members of Congress than the frank. Members of Congress are
allowed by law to send materia l through the ma il free
of charge by substituting their facsimile Signature
(frallk) for postage. Bu t rather than using this franking privilege to keep their constituents informed
about the government. most members use franked
newsletters and questionnaires as campaign literature. That is why use of the frank soars in the months
before an election.
Thus the frank amounts to a taxpayer subsidy of
members ' campaigns. a perk that bolsters the electora l fortunes of incumbents. Some reformers do not
believe that it is possible to fence in congressional use
of the frank for public education or other legitimate
purposes, and so they propose abolishing it outright.
Other reformers argue that the frank can be fenced in
by prohibiting mailings just before primaries and
general elections.
For years Congress routinely exempted itself from
many of the laws it passed. In defense of this practice
members said that if members of Congress were subject to, for example, the minimum wage laws, the executive branch, charged with enforcing these laws, would
acquire excessive power over Congress. This would violate the separation of powers. But as public criticism of
Congress grew and confidence in government declined,
more and more people demanded that Congress subject
itself to the laws that applied to everybody else. In 1995
the 104th Congress did this by passing a bill that obliges Congress to obey eleven important laws governing
th ings such as civil rights, occupational safety, fair
labor standards, and family leave.
The bipartisan Congressional Accountability Act
of 1995 had to solve a key problem: under the constitutional doctrine of separated powers. it would
have been unwise and perhaps unconstitutional for
the executive branch to enforce congressional compliance with executive-branch regulations. So Congress created the independent Office of Compliance
and an employee grievance procedure to deal with
implementation. Now Congress, too, must obey laws
such as the Civil Rights Act. the Equal Pay Act. the
Age Discrimination Act, and the Family and Medica l
Care Leave Act.

The Post-9111 Congress
As already mentioned. bills containing money for
local dams. bridges. roads . and monuments are
rcl'erred to disparagingly as pork-barrel legislation.
Refurmcrs cum plain that when members act to
"brillg home the bacon." Cungress mi sa ll ocates tax
dollars by supporting proj ec ts with trivial social benefits in order to bolster their reelection prospects.
No one can doubt the value or trimming unnecessary spending. but pork is not necessarily the villain it
is made out to be. For example. the main cause of the
budget deficit was the increase in spending on entitlement programs (like hea lth ca re and interest on the
national debt) without a corresponding increase in
taxes. Spending on pork is a small [raction or spending
on en titlements. and most categories of pork spending
have decreased in the last ten or llfteen years. Furthermore. une person's pork is another person 's necessity.
No doubt some congressional districts get an unnecessary bridge or highway. but others get bridges and
highways that arc long overdue. The notion that every
bridge or road a member of Congress gets for his or her
district is wasterul pork is tantamount to saying that
no member attaches any importance to merit.
Even if all pork were bad . it would still be necessary. Congress is an independent branch of government. and each member is. by constitutional design.
the advocate of his or her district or state. No member's vote can be won by coercion. and few can be had
by mere appeals to party loyalty or presidential needs.
PQrk is a way of obtaining consent. The only alternative is bribery. but bribery. besides being wrong. would
benellt only the member. whereas pork usually beneIlts voters in the member's district. If you want to
eliminate pork. you must eliminate Congress, by converting it into a parliament under the control of a
powerful party leader or prime minister. In a tightly
controlled parliament no votes need be bought; they
can be commanded . But members of such a parliament can do little to help their constituents cope with
govern ment or to defend them against bureaucratic
abuses. nor can they investigate the conduct of the
executive branch. The price of a citizen-oriented Congress is a pork-oriented Congress.

The Post-9/ll Congress
Criti cs of Congress sometimes complain that the body
ca nnot plan. cannot act quickly, and ca nnot change
how it is organized in order to meet new challenges.

359

Pork Barrel

Before the Civil War it was the custom to take salt
pork from barrels and distribute it to the slaves.
Often the eagerness of the slaves to get the food
would result in a rush on the barrels, with each
slave trying to get as much as possible.
By the 1870s members of Congress were using
the term pork to refer to benefits for their districts
and pork barrel to mean the piece of legislation
containing those benefits.
Today the classic example of pork-barrel legis lation is the rivers and harbors bill, which provides appropriations for countless dams, bridges,
and canals to be built in congressional districts all
over the country.
Source: From Safire's Political Dictionary by William Safire. Copyright © 1968, 1972, 1978 by William Safire. Reprinted by permis-

sion of Random House, Inc. and the author.

There is some truth to this line of criticism, but it is
important to remember that the Framers purposely
crafted Congress as an institution to favor deliberation over dispatch: to act boldly only when backed by
a persistent popular majority. or a broad consensus
a mong its leaders. or both: and to be slow to change
its time-honored procedures and structures. Consider
what has happened since September 11 , 2001. concer ning Congress and terrorism.
In its 2004 report. the bipartisan National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States.
better known as the 9/11 Commission. recommended that Congress consider making fundamental changes in how it oversees the Department of

360

Chapter 13

Congress

HOW THINGS WORK

Rules on Congressional Ethics
Senate

House

Gifts: No gifts (in money, meals, or things) totaling

Gifts: No gifts (in money, meals, or things) totaling

$100 or more from anyone except a spouse or personal friend .
Lobbyists may not pay for gifts, official travel, legal
defense funds, or charitable contributions to
groups controlled by senators.
Fees: No fees for lectures or writing ("honoraria"),
except that fees of up to $2,000 may go to a
senator-designated charity.
Outside earned income may not exceed 15 percent of
a senator's salary.
Ex-senators may not try to influence members of
Congress for one year after leaving the Senate.
Mass mailings: No senator may receive more than
$50,000 from the Senate to send out a mailing to
constituents.

$100 or more from anyone except a spouse or personal friend.
Lobbyists may not offer gifts or pay for travel, even if
lobbyist is a spouse or personal friend.
Travel: House members may travel at the expense of
others if travel is for officially connected meetings.
Fees: No honoraria for House members.
Ex-House members may not lobby Congress for one
year after leaving office.

Homeland Security and other federal agencies invo lved in intelligence-gathering and coun ter-terrorism activities.
Specifically, the 9/ 11 Commission warned that
under "existing rules and resolutions the House and
Senate intelligence committees lack the power, influence, a nd susta in ed ca pability to meet this challenge. " 30 The "reform s we have suggested, " th e
Commission concluded, "will not work if congressiona l oversight does not change too. Unity of effort in executive management can be lost iJ it is fractured by
divided congressional oversight." 3 I But the 9/ 11 Commission also frankly acknowledged that "few things are
more difficult to change in Washin gton than congressional committee jurisdiction and prerogatives. " 32
Shortly after the November 2004 elections. those
words seemed both timely and prophetic. Fresh from
a ree lection victory, with his own party lead in g both
the House and the Senate, President Geo rge W. Bush
urged Congress to pass a bill embodyin g key 9 / 11
Commi ssion recommend ations. Initially, the presi-

dent's plan was opposed on Ca pi to l Hill by many
Repub lican leaders, as well as by senior Democrats
w hose co mmittee jurisdiction a nd prerogatives
see med threatened by th e president's proposa ls.
Finally. however, Congress passed measures embodying many of the 9 / 11 Commiss ion's proposals for
reorga nizing the federal government's in telligencegatherin g a nd other co unterterrori sm activities.
Still. whatever additiona l a ntiterrorism bills, big
or sma ll , are passed or blocked before the presidential
election in 2008, it will a lm ost certa inly take Congress the remainder of the present deca de or longer
to reorganize itself accord in gly. Meanwhile, Congress faces the challenge mentioned at the very outset of this chapter: to ensure that "the first branch "
ca n con tinue to function should a terrorist attack ki ll
or incapacitate many or most of its members. In its
May 2003 report, the bipartisan Co ntinuity of Government Commission noted that. in the aftermath of
the 9/ll attacks, "our government was ab le to funclion t hrough normal constitutiona l chann els." 33

The Post-9 /11 Congress

'The 9111 Commission, that reported on why Al Qaeda was able to attack America, held hearings
in 20Q4,

But it could easily have been otherw ise. Intelligence officials believe that the four th plane involved
in the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks, United Flight 93, was
headed for the Capitol. But the plane took 0[[ late,
and some passen gers learned via cell phones that
their flight was a suicide mission; they stormed the
cockpit, bringing the plane down in Pennsylvania.
The Co ntinuity Commiss ion urged members to recognize how close Co ngress had come to disaster on
9111, look ahead, a nd think the unthinkable. "The
greatest hole in our constitutional system is the possibility of a n attack that would kill or injure many
members of Co ngress" :

Imagine a Hou se of Representatives hit by an
attack killing more than half the members and
unable to reconstitute itself for months. Imagin e
any attack killing th e president and vice president .. . Imagine a biological attack that prevented
Cong ress from convening for months for fear of
spreading infectiou s agents... (R) ecall that in the

days after September 11th, Congress authorized
the use of force in Afghanistan; appropriated
funds for reconstruction of New York anclfor military preparations; and passed major legislation
granting additional investigati ve powers and
improving transportation security ... 111 the event
of a disaster that debilitated Co ngress, the vacuum cou ld be fill ed by unilateral executive actionperhaps a benign form of martial law. The
co untry might get by, but at a terrible cost to our
democratic institutions. 34
This "hole" in America's constitutional system is
smaller with respect to the Senate than it is with
respect to the House. Under the Seventeenth Amendment, governors can fill Senate vacancies within
days by temporary appointment. The House, however, can 1111 vacancies only by special election (a
process that, on average, takes states about [our
months to complete). In addition, the House's offtcial
interpretation o[ its quorum requirement makes it

361

362

Chapter 13

Congress

HOW THINGS WORK
How Congress Raises Its Pay
For over two hundred years Congress has tried to
find a politically painless way to raise its own pay. It
has managed to vote itself a pay increase twentythree times in those two centuries, but usually at the
price of a hostile public reaction . Twice during the
nineteenth century a pay raise led to a massacre of
incumbents in the next election .
Knowing this, Congress has invented various ways
to get a raise without actually appearing to vote for
it. These have included the following :
• Voting for a ta x deduction for expenses incurred
as a result of living in Washington
• Creating a citizens commission that could recommend a pay increase that would take effect automatically, provided Congress did not vote against it
• Linking increases in pay to decreases in honoraria
(that is, speaking fees)

conceivabl e th at, if only, say, 30 members were living
and present, a group of 16 might proceed with business and elect a new Speaker who could. in the event
that the president and vice president were also kil led.
become president.
Without providing detai ls or proposing precise
language, the Continui ty Commission recommended
a constitutional amendment that empowers governors , in the aftermath of a catastrophic attack, to
appo int temporary representatives to fill seats in the
House and in the Senate that are held by killed or
incapacitated members. It urged Congress to draft
and propose such an amendment as soon as possible,
and expressed hope that the measure mig ht be
adopted within a two-year period.

In 1989 a commission recommended a congressional pay raise of over 50 percent (from $89,500 to
$135,000) and a ban on honoraria . The House
planned to let it take effect automatically. But the
public wouldn't have it, demanding that Congress
vote on the raise-and vote it down . It d id.
Embarrassed by its maneuvering, Congress retreated . At the end of 1989 it voted itself (as well as most
top executive and judicial branch members) a small
pay increase (7 .9 percent for representatives, 9.9 percent for senators) that also provided for automatic
cost-of-living adjustments (up to 5 percent a year) in
the future . But the automatic adjustments in congressional pay have been rejected every year in
recorded roll -call votes . Apparently nobody in Congress wants to be accused of "getting rich" at the
taxpayers' expense.

In mid-2004, the House passed a bill mandating
that if 100 or more members are ki ll ed, the speaker
will issue a resolution calling for expedited special
elections in vacant districts. But the bill fell far short
of the Continuity Commission·s proposed constitutiona l amendment, and several parts of the bill (for
example, a provision to redefine a quorum after the
fact to exclude incapacitated members) were widely
believed to be unconstitutiona l. At the start of the
109th Co ngress in 2005, no major bills were proposed to enact the Continuity Commission's recommendations. Th us, whi le some important bills h ave
been passed and some institutiona l changes h ave
been made to combat terrorism, the post-9111 Congress still closely resemb les the pre-9 / 11 Congress.

Nonpartisan Panel Proposes
Lettmg Party Chiefs Pick
Committee Chairs

February 14
WASHINGTON

j

II I f

MEMORANDUM
To: Representative Sally Brook
From: Joe Tell, chief of staff
Subject: Proposal for Appointment by
Party Leaders

Traditiona lly there h b
be
'
as een I
come a congressiona l c
' on y one way to
everyone else' TIle SO-called
' ommlttee
chair: Olltl
"
ast
person with the lonoest t ,senlOnty system let the
It. Th,s eliminated fb,'ght enUl e on a committee chal'r
,
s over s I '
easIer for legislators with
e ectlOn~ and made it
AfncanAmericans 'tl
unpopular VIews and fio
,,
WI 1 tenure t b
r
CntlCS claim it I
, 0 ecome chairs B t
, u,
, a so SOmetImes I d '
people atop important co
' an ed Incompetent
er for party leaders t
n1JTIlttees, and made it hardd
0 move maIo' I '
,
ay, a nonpartisan gr
f " l egIslatIOn, Yesterthe seniority system ~~Pd~ceexperts ca lled for giving
lettllJg party leaders
,nt but deep burial" and
appolllt committee chaIrs,
'
,,

You are on record as opposing
the seniority system, but you have
hitherto expressed no views in public
about other methods by which
committee chairs can be selected, One
is election by party caucus , Letting party members elect committee
chairs has some advantages: autocratic chairs can be ousted and committee chairs are
likely to reflect the views of most party members, But it also has several disadvantages:
it invites bruising fights for leadership posts that can divide party members and
produce committee chairs who are not loyal to party leaders, Another method, now
being debated around town and about which you might be asked at tomorrow's press
briefing, is appointment by party leaders,
Arguments for:
1. Having the Speaker, majority leader, or minority leader choose chairs would increase
party discipline and accountability,
2. Appointment by party leaders would make it easier for party programs to be
enacted ,
Arguments against:
1. Concentrating so much power in the hands of party leaders could corrupt even the
best or most public-spirited of them .
2. Qualified and worthy members would be denied chairs just because they are out of
favor with party leaders,
Your decision:
Favor proposal _ __
Oppose proposal _ __

364

Chapter 13

*
O

Congress

SUMMARY

ver the last half century or so Congress, especially the House, has evolved through three stages.
During the first stage, lasting from the end of
World War I until the early 1960s, the House was
dominated by powerful committee chairmen who
controlled the agenda, decided which members
would get what services for their constituents, and
tended to follow the leadership of the Speaker. Newer
members were expected to be seen but not heard:
power and prominence came only after a long
apprenticeship. Congressional staffs were small, and
so members dealt with each other face to face.
The second stage emerged in the early 1970s, in
part as the result of trends already under way (for
example, the steady growth in the number of staffers
assigned to each member) and in part as a result of
changes in procedures and organization brought
about by younger, especia lly northern. members. Dissatisfied with southern resistance to civil rights bills
and emboldened by a sharp increase in the number of
liberals who had been elected in the Johnson landslide
of 1964, the House Democratic caucus adopted rules
that allowed the caucus to select committee chairmen
without regard to seniority, dramatically increased
the number and staffs of subcommittees (for the first
time, the Ways and Means Committee was required to
have subcommittees) , authorized individual committee members (instead of the chairman) to choose the
chairmen of these subcommittees, ended the ability
of chairmen to refuse to call meetings, and made it
much harder for those meetings to be closed to the
pUblic. The installation of electronic voting made it
easier to require recorded votes, and so the number of
times each member had to go on record rose sharply.
The Rules Committee was instructed to issue more
rules that would allow floor amendments.
At the same time, the number of southern
Democrats in leadership positions began to decline,
and the conservatism of the remaining ones began to
lessen. (In 1990 southerners held only a quarter of
committee chairmanships in the House and none of
the major party leadership posts.) Moreover. northern and southern Democrats began to vote together
a bit more frequently (though the conservative Boll
Weevils remained a significant- and often swi nggroup).

These changes created a House ideally suited to
serve the reelection needs of its members. Each representative could be an individual political entrepreneur, seeking publicity, claiming credit, introducing
bills. holding subcommittee hearings, and assigning
staffers to work on constituents' problems. There was
no need to defer to powerful party leaders or committee chairmen. But because representatives in each
party were becoming more a like ideologically, there
was a rise in party voting. Congress became a career
attractive to men and women skil led in these techniques, and these people entered Congress in large
numbers. Their ski ll was manifest in the growth of
the sophomore surge- the increase in their winning
percentage during their first reelection campaign.
Even junior members could now make their mark
on legislation. In the House more floor amendments
were offered and passed; in the Senate filibusters
became more commonplace. Owing to multiple
referrals and overlapping subcommittee jurisdictions. more members cou ld participate in writing
bills and overseeing government agencies.
But lurking within the changes that defined the
second stage were others, less noticed at the time,
that created the beginnings of a new phase. The
third stage was an effort in the House to strengthen
and centra li ze party leadership. The Speaker
acquired the power to appoint a majority of the
members of the Rules Committee. That body, worried
by the flood of floor amendments, began issuing
more restrictive rules. By the mid-1980s this had
reached the point where Republicans were complainin g that they were being gagged. The Speaker also got
control of the Democratic Steering and Policy Committee (it assigns new members to committees) and
was given the power to refer bills to several committees simultaneously.
The evolution of the House remains an incomplete story; it is not yet clear whether it wil l remain in
stage two or find some way of moving decisively into
stage three. For now it has elements of both.
Meanwhile the Senate remains as individualistic
and decentralized as ever- a place where it has
always been difficult to exercise strong leadership.
Though its members may complain that Congress
is collectively weak, to any vis itor from abroad it

Summary

seems extraordinarily powerful. probably the most
powerful legislative body in the world. Congress has
always been jealous of its constitutional independence and authority. Three compelling events led to
Congress's reasserting its authority: the increasingly
unpopular war in Vietnam; the Watergate scandals,
which revealed a White House meddling illegally in
the electoral process; and the advent of divided governments-with one party in control of the presidency and the other in control of Congress . It
remains to be seen, however, whether Congress will
function differently with the return of unified party
government or in response to the threat of terrorism.

Claims that Congress became weak as the president grew stronger are a bit overdrawn. As we shall
see in the next chapter. the view from the White
House is quite different. Recent presidents have complained bitterly of their inability to get Congress
even to act on, much less approve, many of their key
proposals and have resented what they regard as
congressional interference in the management of
executive-branch agencies and the conduct of foreign affairs. If the past is prologue. the present era
of unified party government will involve plenty of
legislative-executive intraparty conflicts.

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?
1. Are memlJers of Congress representative of the

American people?
Demographically, no: most Americans are not
middle-aged white males with law degrees or past
political careers. Some groups (for example, women)
are much less prevalent in Congress than they are in
the nation as a whole, while other groups (for example, Catholics) constitute about the same fraction
of Congress as they do of the American people.
Ideologically, Republican members of Congress are
more conservative than average Americans, and
Democratic members of Congress are more liberal
than average Americans.

2. Does COl1gress l10rmally do what most citizens
want it to do?
On most issues most of the time. Congress is in step
with the public. But on some issues, most representatives' opinions are generally out of sync with mass public preferences. For example. most Americans have long
favored protectionist trade policies, but most members
of Congress have consistently voted for free trade policies. Likewise. most citizens are less solicitous of laws
that reinforce civil liberties than the Congress has traditionally been. This, however. is much as the Framers
of the Constitution had hoped and expected. They
believed that representatives should refine, not reOect,
public wishes, and mediate, not mirror, public views.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?
1. Should Congress rLm Linder strong leadership?

Congress has tried it both ways. Sometimes the
House has had a strong Speaker, sometimes a weak
one; sometimes committee chairmen were selected
by seniority, sometimes by the Speaker. and sometimes by party vote. If we want a Congress that can
act quickly and decisively as a body, then we should
desire strong leadership, place restrictions on debate,
provide few opportunities for stalling tactics. and
brook only minimal committee interference. But if
we want a Congress in which the interests of individual members and the people they represent are routinely protected or enhanced, then we must reject
strong leadership, proliferate rules allowing for delay
and discussion. and permit many opportunities for

committee activity. Unfortunately, the public often
wants both systems to operate, the ilrst for some
issues and the second for others.
2. Should C01lgress act more (luic1dy?
The Framers of the Constitution knew that Congress
would normally proceed slowly and err in favor of
deliberative. not decisive, action. Congress was
intended to check and balance strong leaders in the
executive branch, not automatically cede its authority to them, not even during a war or other national
crisis. Today, the increased ideological and partisan
polarization among members has arguably made
Congress even less capable than it traditionally has
been of planning ahead or swiftly adopting coherent

365

366

C/Ulpter 13

Congress

changes in national policies. There is. however. on ly
conflicting evidence concerning whether so-called
policy gridlock has become more common than in
decades past. Since September 11. 2001 terrorist
attacks on the United States. Congress has passed
a host of new laws intended to enhance America 's
homeland security. Still. Congress took its time with

several major proposals to reorganize the government
around homeland security priorities. Some cite this as
but the latest. and potentially the gravest. exa mple of
what's wrong with Congress. But others cite it as a
sa lutary reminder that a Congress that could move
swiftly to enact wise homeland security or other policies could also move swiftly to adopt unwise ones.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

House of Representatives: w w w.house.gov
Senate: www.senate .gov
Library of Congress
thomas.loc.gov
Icwe b.loc.gov / global/le gislative/ congress

For news about Congress
Roll Call magazine: w ww. rollcall.com
C-SPAN: w ww.c-span.org

SUGGESTED READINGS
Ar n old . R. Duu glas. Th e Logic of COllgressioll(l 1 Aelioll . New Haven
a nd Lundu n: Ya le Un iversity Press . .l <) <)0 . Ma sterfu l a nalys is of
huw Con gress su metim es passes bills th at ser ve th e ge neral
public. not just specia l interests.
Dav idson . Roger H .. a nd Wa lter J. Oleszek. COllgress (l lId Its Mel1l bers. 7th ed . Washin gtu n . D.C.: Cun gress iun a l Quarterly Press.
2000. Co mplete a nd auth orita ti ve acco u n t uf whu is in Cu ngress a nd h uw it operates.
Fenno. Rich ard E. Jr. COllgresslll ell ill COllllllillees. Busto n: Lillie.
Brown. 1 <) 73. Study of the styles of twelve sta ndin g committees.
Fiurin a. Morri s P. COllgress: Key stoll e of til e Wash illgwll Esta!J/jshIIIWl. 2d cd . New Haven . Cunn.: Ya le Uni versi ty Press. I <)!l9.
Argues th a t cu ngression a l beh av iur is a imed at gu ara ntee in g
their ch a nces fur reelectiun .
Ja cobsun . Ga ry. Th e Politics of COllgressiollal Electioll s. 4 th ed . New
Yurk : Lon gma n . ] '1'17. Auth orita tive study of huw mem bers of
Con gress a re elected .
Maass. Arth ur. COllgress IIl1d the COl II 111011 Good. ew York : Basic
Books. 1 '183. InSightfu l accuu nt of cong ressiun a l operation s.
espec ia lly thuse invulvi ng legisla ti ve-executi ve rel a ti on s. Disputes Fiurin a's a rgum en t th at reelection n eeds ex plain congressiuna l behav ior.

Ma lb in . Mich ael J. Ull e/erted Hepresellwti ves . Ne w Yu rk : Bas ic
Buuks. 1 980. Study uf th e influ en ce uf cun gressiunal staff
members.
Ma nn . Thomas E.. a nd Norman J. Orn stein . /l ell ewillg COII!Jress. 2
vo ls. Wash ington. D.C.: Broukin gs Instituti un an d America n
Enterprise Institute. 1 '1'1 3. Sup<.: rb overv iew uf wha t 's rea lly
wrong w ith Cun gress and huw to i1 x it.
Puu le. Keith '1'.. a nd Howard Ruse nth a l. COllgress: A PoliUCIIIEt'OIWlll ie History of Roll Call Votillg. New Yurk: Ox furd Un iversity Press. ] '197 . Suph isticated study uf why mem bers uf Co ngress vote as th ey do a nd h uw rela tively stable cun gressiona l
vutin g pa tterns h ave bee n throu gh uut Amer ican h istory.
Smi th . Steven S.. a nd Christoph er j . Deering. COII/II/ illees ill COIIgress. Wa shin gtun . D.C.: Cu n g ress ion a l Qu arterly. 1 '184.
An a lys is uf huw differen t kind s uf cu ngression a l co mm ittees
upera te.
SundquiSt. Ja mes L. Til e Declille lI/ul Hes ll rgeJIce of COllgress. Washin gtun . D.C. : Broukin gs Insti tu tiun. 1 '18 1. A histury of the fa ll
a nd . after 1'173. the rise o f con gression a l power vis-a-vis th e
presid en t.

CHAPTER

14

The Presidency

Presidents and Prime Ministers

Who Gets Appointed

Divided Government

Presidential Character

Does Gridlock Matter? •
Gridlock Bad?

Is Policy

The Evolution of the Presidency
Concerns of the Founders • The
Electoral College • The President's
Term of Office • The First Presidents •
The Jacksonians • The Reemergence of
Congress

The Powers of the President
The Office of the President
The White House Office • The
Executive Office of the President •
The Cabinet • Independent Agencies,
Commissions. and Jllrlnp~him

The Power to Persuade
The Three Audiences • Popularity and
Influence • The Decline in Popularity

The Power to Say No
Veto • Executive Privilege •
Impoundment of Funds

The President's Program
Putting Together a Program •
Attempts to Reorganize

Presidential Transition
The Vice President • Problems of
Succession • Impeachment

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

2.

Did the Founders expect the presi dency to be the most important
political institution?
How important is the president's character in determining how he governs?

2.

Should we abolish the electoral
college?
Is it harder to govern when the presidency and the Congress are controlled by different political parties?

P

rofessor Jones spea ks to his politica l science class: "T he president of
the United States occupies one of the most powerful offices in the
world. Presidents Kennedy and Johnso n sent American troops to Vietnam.
President Bush sent them to Saudi Arabia . a nd President Clin ton sent them
to Kosovo, all without war being decl ared by Congress. President Nixon
imposed wage and price controls on the country. Between them. Presidents
Carter and Reaga n se lected most of the federa l judges now on the bench:
thus the poli tica l philosophies of th ese two men were stamped on the
courts. President Geo rge W. Bush created military tribuna ls to try captured
terrorists and persuaded Congress to toughen antiterrorist laws. No wonder
people ta lk about our having an 'imperial presidency... ·
A few doors dow n the hall. Professor Smith speaks to her class: "The
president. compa red to the prime ministers of other democratic nations. is
one of the weakest chief executives a nywhere. P res ident Carter signed an
arms- limitation treaty with the Sov iets. but the Senate wouldn ' t ratify it.
President Reagan was not a ll owed even to test antisateliite weapons. a nd in
1986 Co ngress rejected hi s bud get before the ink was dry. Pres ident Clinton's hea lth care plan was ignored. and the House voted to impeach him.
Reg ularly. subord inates who are supposed to be loya l to the pres ident leak
his views to the press and undercut his programs before Congress. No wonder people call the U.S. president a 'pitiful. helpl ess giant. '"
Ca n Professors Jones a nd Smith be ta lk in g about the same offi ce? Who is
right? In fact they are both right. The American presidency is a unique
office. with elements of great strength nnd profound weakness bui lt into it
by its constitutional or ig ins.

~ Presidents and Prilne Ministers
The popularly elected president is a n America n invention . Of the roughly
five dozen co untri es in which there is some deg ree of party competition and
thus. pres umably. some measure of free choice for the voters. only sixteen
have a directly elected president. and thirteen of these are nations of North
and South America . The democratic a lternative is for the chief executive to
be a prim e mini ster. chosen by and responsible to the parliament. This system prevails in most Western European countries as well as in Israel and
Japan. There is no nation with a purely pres idential political system in

368

Presidents and Prim e Ministe rs

The first cabinet: left to right. Secretary of Wa r Henry
Knox. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson. Attom l'Y
General Edmund Randolph. Secretary of tile Treasury
Alexander Ham ilton. and President George WasllillgtOlI.

Europe; France combines a directly elected president
with a prime minister and par liament. 1
In a pa rli a menta ry system the prime minister is
the chief exec utive. The prime minister is chosen not
by the voters bu t by the legislature. and he or she in
turn selects the other min isters from the members of
parlia ment. If the pa rliamen t has only two major
pa rties. the ministers will usually be chosen from the
majority party: if there are ma ny pa rties (as in Italy).
several parties may par ticipate in a coa lition cabinet.
The prime min ister remains in power as long as his or
her par ty h as a majority of the seats in the legislature or as long as the coa lition he or she has assembled holds together. The voters choose who is to be a
member of parliament -usually by voting for one or
a nother party-but cannot choose who is to be the
chief executive officer.
Whether a nation has a presidential or a parli amentary system makes a big difference in the identity a nd powers of the ch ief executive.

• Presidents Are Often Outsiders People become
president by winning elections, a nd sometimes winning is eas ier if you can show the voters that yo u are
not part of "the mess in Was hington." Prime ministers are selected from amon g people already in parlia ment. and so they are always insiders.
Jimmy Carter. Ronald Reagan . Bill Clinton, and
George W. Bush did not hold national office before
becoming president. Fra nklin Roosevelt had been
ass ista nt secreta ry of the navy, but his real political
experience was as governor of New York. Dwight
Eisenhower was a general, not a politician . John F.
Kennedy, Lynd on Johnson, and Rich ard Nixo n h ad
been in Congress, bu t on ly Nixon had had top-level
experience in th e executive bra nch (he had been vice
president). George H.w. Bush had h ad a great deal of
executive experience in Washin gton-as vice president, director of the CIA, a nd representative to
Ch ina, whereas Bill Clinton a nd George W. Bush both
served as govern ors.
From 1828 throu gh 2000, th irty-one differen t
people were elected pres ident. Of these, the great
majority were governors, military leaders, or vice
pres idents; only 1 3 percen t were leg islators just
before becoming president.
• Presidents Choose Cabinet Members from Outside
Congress Under the Constitution, no sitting member
of Congress can hold office in the executive branch.
The persons chosen by a prime minister to be in the
cabinet are almost always members of parliament.
Of the rifteen heads of cabinet-level departments
in the fi rst George W. Bush administration, on ly fou r
had been members of Co ngress. The rest, as is customary with most presidents, were close person al
friends or campaign aides , representatives of importa nt constituencies (for exa mple, fa rmers, blacks, or
women ). experts on va rious policy issues, or some
combination of all three.
The prime minister of Great Bri tain, by co ntrast,
picks all of his or her cabinet mini sters from a mon g
members of Parliament. This is one way by which
the prime minister exercises control over the legislature. If you were an ambitious member of Parliament, eager to become prime min iste r yo ur self
someday, a nd if you knew that your main cha nce of
rea lizing that a mbition was to be appOinted to a
series of ever-more-important cabinet posts, then
you wo uld not be likely to a ntagonize the person
doing the appointing.

369

370

Chapter 14

The Presidency

• Presidents Have No Guaranteed Majority in the
Legislature A prime minister's party (or coalition)

always has a majority in parliament; if it did not,
somebody else wou ld be prime minister. A president's
party often does not have a congressional majority;
instead, Congress is often controlled by the opposite
party, creating a divided government. Divided government means that cooperation between the two
branches, hard to achieve under the best of circumstances, is often further reduced by partisan bickering.
Even when one party controls both the White
House and Congress. the two branches often work at
cross-purposes. The U.S. Constitution created a system of separate branches sharing powers. The
authors of the document expected that there would
be conflict between the branches, and they h ave not
been disappointed .
When Kennedy was president. his party, the
Democrats. held a big majority in the House and the
Senate. Yet Kennedy was frustrated by his inabili ty to
get Congress to approve proposals to en large civil
rights, supply federa l aid for school construction . create a Department of Urban Affairs and Housing, or
establish a program of subsidized med ica l care for
the elderly. During his last year in office. Congress
passed on ly about one-fourth of his proposals. Carter
did not fare m uch better; even though the Democrats
controlled Congress, many of his most important
proposals were defeated or greatly modified. Only
Franklin Roosevelt (1933- 1945) and Lyndo n Johnson (1963- 1969) had even brief success in leading
Congress. and for Roosevelt most of that success was
confined to his first term or to wartime.

*-

Divided Governnlent

In the forty-eight years between 1952 and 2000.
there were twenty-four congressional or presidential
elections. Sixteen of the twenty-four produced divide d governme nt- that is , a government in which

divided government

One party controls the
White House and another party contro ls one
or both houses of Congress.
unified government The same party co ntrols
the White House and both houses of Cong ress .

British Prime Minister Tony BInir izeads n pnr/i(l/ Il entnry,
mther thnn n presidentin /, governmellt.
one party controls the Wh ite House and a different
party controls one or both houses of Congress. When
George W. Bush became president in 2001, it was
on ly the third time since 1969 that the same party
controll ed the White House and Congress, creating a
unifie d governmen t. And it was only the first time
since 1953 when the Rep ubli ca ns were in ch arge.
But not long after the Senate convened , one Republican, James Jeffords of Vermont announced th at he
was an independent and voted with the Democrats.
Divided government had returned until an additiona l Republican was elected to the Senate in 2002.
Americans say they don't like divided government.
They, or at least the pundits who claim to speak for
them, think divided government produces partisan
bickering, political paralysis, and policy grid lock. During the 1990 battle between President Bush and a
Democratic Congress, one magazine compared it to a
movie featuring the Keystone Kops, characters (rom

Divided Govern ment
the silen t m ovies who wild ly chased each other
around while accomplishing nothin g. 2 In the 199 2
campa ign. Bush, Clinton, a nd Ross Perot bemoa ned
the "sta lemate" that had developed in Was hin gton.
When Clinton was sworn in as presid ent, ma ny commentators spoke approvingly of the "end of gridl ock."
There are two thin gs wro ng with these compla ints. First, it is not clear that divided government
produces a grid lock that is any worse than that which
exists with unUled government. Second , it is not clear
that, even if gridlock does exist, it is al ways, or even
usua lly, a bad thing for the country.

Does Gridlock Matter?
Despite the well-publicized stories about presidentia l
budget proposals being ignored by Congress (Democrats used to describe Reagan 's and Bu sh's budgets as
being "dead on arrival"), it is not easy to tell whether
divided governments produce fewer or worse poliCies
than unified ones. The scholars who have looked
closely at the matter have. in genera l, concluded that
di vided gover nments do about as well as unified ones
in passing important laws, conducting importa nt
investigations, and ratifying significa nt treaties.3
Politica l scientist Dav id Mayhew studied 267 importa nt laws that were enacted between 1946 a nd
199 0 . These laws were as likely to be passed when
different parties contro lled the White House a nd
Congress as when the same party co ntro lled both
bra nches. 4 For example. divided governments produ ced the 1946 Marsh all Pla n to rebuild war-torn
Europe a nd the 1986 Tax Reform Act.
Why do divided governments produce about as
much importan t legislation as unified ones? The
main reason is that "un ified government" is something of a myth. Just beca use the Republicans control both the presidency and Congress does not mean
that the Republican president and the Republican
senators and representatives will see things the same
way. For one thing, Repub licans are themselves divided between conservatives (ma inly from the South)
and li berals (ma inly from the Nor theast a nd Mid west). They disagree about policy a lmost as much as
Republica ns a nd Democrats disagree. For a nother
thing, the Constitution ensures that the pres ident
and Congress will be riva ls for power and thus rivals
in po licy-making. That's what the separa tion of powers a nd checks and ba la nces are a ll about.
As a result. periods of unified government often
turn out not to be so unified. Democratic pres ident

Lynd on Johnson could not get ma ny Democratic
members of Congress to support his war policy in
Vietnam. Democratic president Jimmy Carter cou ld
not get the Democratic-controll ed Sena te to ratify his
strateg ic a rms limitation treaty. Democra tic president Bill Clinton could not get the Democra tic Co ngress to go a long with his policy on gays in the
m il ita ry or his health proposa ls: a nd when the heavily rev ised Clinton budget did pass in 1993 , it was by
just one vote.
The only time there really is a unilled government
is when not just the same par ty but the same ideological wing of that party is in effective control of both
branches of government. This was true in 1933
when Franklin Roosevelt was pres iden t a nd ch angeoriented Democrats controlled Congress, a nd it was
true again in 1965 wh en Lyndon Johnson and liberal Democrats dominated Con gress. Both were periods
when many major policy initiatives became law:
Socia l Security, business regul ations, Medica re, and
civil rights legislation. But these periods of ideologically unified government are very ra re.

Is Policy Gridlock Bad?
An American presid ent has less abi lity to decide
wha t laws get passed tha n does a Bri tish prime minister. If yo u thi nk that the job of a pres ident is to
"lea d the co un try. " tha t weakness wi ll wor ry you.
The only cure for that weak ness is either to cha nge
the Constitutio n so that our governmen t resembles
the pa rli amen tary system in effect in Great Britain,
or always to vote into office members of Con gress
who not only are of th e same par ty as the president
but also agree with him on policy issues.
We suspect that even Americans who hate gridlock a nd wa nt more leadership aren't ready to make
sweeping constitutional ch anges or to stop voting for
presidents and members of Con gress from different
pa rties. This unwillingness suggests that they like the
idea of somebody being able to block a policy they
don 't like. Since a ll of us don't IU<e so mething, we all
have a n interest in some deg ree of gridlock.
And we seem to protect that in terest. In a typical
pres identia l election , about one-fourth of a ll voters

The inability of the government to
act because rival parties control different parts
of th e government.

gridlock

3 71

372

Chapter 14

The Presidency

will vote for one party's ca ndid ate for president and
the other par ty's candid ate for Cong ress. As a result.
about one-fourth of a ll congressiona l districts will be
represented in the House by a perso n who does not
belong to the pa rty of the president who carried that
district. Some scholars believe that voters sp lit tickets
deliberately in ord er to create divided government
a nd thus magnify the e/Tects of the checks and ba la nces built into our system. bu t th e ev id ence supporting this belief is not co nclusive.
Gridlock. to the extent that it exists. is a necessa ry
consequence of a system of represen tative democracy. Such a system cau ses delays. intensifi es deliber ations. forces compromises. a nd requires the creation
of broad-based coalitions to support most new policies. This system is the opposite of direct democracy.
If you believe in direct democracy. you believe that
what the people want on some issue should become
law with as little fuss and bother as possible. Political
grid locks are like traffic gridl ocks- people get overheated. thin gs boil over. nothing moves, and nobody
win s except journalists who write about the mess
a nd lobbyists who charge bi g fees to steer their clients
around the tie-up. In a direct democracy, the president would be a traffic cop with broad powers to
decide in what direction the trafll c should move a nd
to make sure that it moves that way.
But if unified governments a re not really unifi ed- if in fact they are spli t by ideological differences
within each par ty a nd by the institution al rivalries
between the presiden t a nd Co ngress- then this
ch a nge is less impor tant than it may seem. What is
important is the relative power of the president and
Congress. That has changed greatly.

The Evolution of the
Presidency
In 1 787 few issues inspired as much debate or concern a mong the Framers as the pro blem of definin g
the chief executive. The delegates feared anarchy and
monarchy in about equal meas ure. When the Co nstitu tiona l Co nvention met, the existing state constitutions gave most, if not all , power to the leg islatures.
In eight states the governor was actu a lly chosen by
th e legislature, and in ten states th e governor could
not serve more tha n one yea r. Only in New Yo rk,
Massachusetts, and Connecticut did governors have
much power or ser ve for any length of time.

Some of the Fra mers proposed a plural national
executive (that is. several peop le would each hold th e
executive power in different a reas, or they would
exercise the power as a co mmittee) . Oth ers wanted
th e executive power checked, as it was in Ma ssachusetts. by a co uncil that would have to approve many
of the ch ief executive 's acti ons. Alexa nder Hamil ton
strongly urged the exact oppos ite: in a five-hour
speech he ca lled for something very much like an
elective monarchy, patterned in some respects after
the Bri tish kind . No one pa id mu ch attention to this
pl a n or even, at first. to the more modest (and ultimately successful) suggestion of Ja mes Wilson for a
single, elected president.
In time, those who won ou t believed that the governing of a large nation. especially one threatened by
foreign enemies, required a single president with significant powers. Their cause was aided. no doubt, by
the fact th at everybody assumed that George Washington would be the first preSident. a nd confidence in
him- a nd in his sense of self-restraint- was widely
shared. Even so. several delegates fea red that the
presidency wo uld become. in the wo rds of Edmund
Ra nd olph of Virginia, '· the foetus of mona rchy."

Concerns of the Founders
The delegates in Phil adelphi a. a nd later the critics of
the new Co nstitution durin g the debate over its ratifi cation. worried about aspects of the presidency that
were quite different fro m those that concer n us
today. In 1787- 1789 some Americans suspected
that the president. by being able to comma nd the
state militia. would u se the mil itia to overpower state
governments. Others were worried that if the president were a llowed to share treaty-making power
with the Senate. he wou ld be "directed by minions
a nd favorites" and become a "tool of the Senate. "
But the most frequent concern was over the possibil ity of presidential reelection: Americans in the late
eighteenth cen tury were suffiCiently suspicious of
huma n nature and sufficiently experienced in the
ar ts of mischievous government to believe that a
presid ent. once elected. wo uld arra nge to stay in
offi ce in perpetuity by reso rtin g to bribery. intrigue,
a nd force. This might happen. for example. every
time the presidential election was thrown into the
House of Representatives because no ca ndid ate had
received a majority of the votes in the electora l college. a situation that most people expected to happen
freq uently.

The Evollltion of the Presidency
In retrospect, these co ncerns seem misplaced,
even foo lish. The power over the m ilitia ha s had little
signiftcance: the election has gone to the House only
twice (1800 a nd 1824): a nd though th e Senate dominated the presidency ofT a nd on during the second
ha lf of the n ineteenth century, it ha s not don e so
recently. The real sources of the expansion or presidential power- the president's role in foreign affairs,
his ability to shape public opinion. his pos ition as
head of the executive bra nch , a nd h is claims to have
certain "inherent" powers by virtue of hi s ofTicewere h ardly predictable in 1787. And not surprisingly. There was nowhere in the world at that time, nor
had there been at any time in hi story, an exa mple or
an American-style presidency. It was a unique and
unprecedented institution. and the Fra mers and
their critics can easily be rorgiven ror not predicting
accura tely how it would evo lve. At a more genera l
level. however. they understood the iss ue quite clearly. Go uverneur Morris or Pe nnsylvani a put the problem of the pres idency this way: "Make him too weak:
the Legislature will u surp his powers. Make him too
strong: he wi ll usurp on the Legislature."
The Framers knew very well that the relati ons
between the presid ent a nd Congress an d the manner
in which the president is elected were of profound
importan ce. and they debated both at great length.
The first plan was for Congress to elect the president-in short, ror the system to be quasi-parliamentary. But if that were done, some delegates pointed
out, Congress could dominate a n honest or lazy president, wh il e a corrupt or scheming president might
dominate Congress.
After mu ch di scussion it was decided that the
president should be chosen directly by voters. But by
which voters? The emerging nation was la rge and
diverse. It seemed unlikely that every citizen would
be ramiliar enough with the candidates to cast an
inrormed vote ror a president directly. Worse, a direct
popular election would give inordinate weight to the
large, popu lous states, and no plan with that outco me had any chance or adoption by the sma ll er
states.

The Electoral College
Thus the e lectoral college was invented. whereby
each of the states wou ld select electors in whatever
manner it wished. The electors would then meet in
each state ca pital an d vote ror president and vice
president. Many Framers expected that this proce-

dure would lead to each state 's electors' voting for a
ravorite son , and thus no candidate wou ld win a
majority or the popular vote. In this event, it was
decided, the House of Representatives should make
the choice, with each state delegation castin g one
vote.
The plan seemed to meet every test: large states
wo uld have their say, but small states would be protected by havin g a minimum of three electora l votes
no matter how tiny the ir population. The sma ll states
togeth er co uld wield co nsiderable influence in the
House, where, it was widely expected, most preSidential elections would ultimately be decided. or course,
it did not work out quite this way: the Fra mers did
not foresee the role that political parties would play
in producing nationwid e support for a sla te of
national candidates.
Once the ma nn er of electing the pres ident was
settled. the question of his powers was mu ch easier
to decide. After a ll , if yo u believe that the procedures
are fair and ba lanced, then you are more con fid en t in
assigning larger powers to the president within this
system. Accordin gly, the right to make treaties and
the right to appoint lesser offi cia ls, originally reserved for the Senate, were given to the president
"with the advice and consent of the Senate."

The President's Term of Office
Another issue was put to rest soon therearter. George
Washingto n , the unanimous choice or the electoral
co llege to be the first president, firmly limited himself
to two terms in office (1789-1797), and no president until Fra nklin D. Roosevelt (1933-1945) dared
to run for more (though Ulysses S. Grant tried). In
1951 the Twenty-second Amendment to the Constitution was ratifi ed, forma lly limiting a ll subsequent
presidents to two terms. The remaining iss ues concerning the nature of the presidency, and especially
the relations between the president and Congress,
have been the subj ect of continuing dispute. The pattern or relationships that we see today is the result of

electoral college The people chosen to cast
each state's votes in a presidential election. Each
state can cast one electoral vote for each senator and re presentative it has. The District of
Columbia has t hree electoral votes, even tho ug h
it can not e lect a re presentative or senato r.

373

374

Chapter 14

The Presinenc!}

a n evolution a ry process that ha s extended over more
than two centuries.
Th e l'irst problem was to establish th e legitimacy
of th e pres idency itself: that is. to ensure. if possible.
pub lic acceptance of the office. its incumbent. and its
powers and to establish an ord erly transfer of power
from one in cumbent to the next.
Today we take this for g ranted. When George W.
Bush was in augurated in January 2001 as our fortythird presiden t. Bill Clinton. the forty-second. qui etly
left the White House. In the world today such an
un eventful success ion is unusual. In many nations a
new c hief executive comes to power with the aid of
military force or as a result of politi ca l intrigue: his
predecessor often leaves ofl'ice di sg raced. exiled. or
dead . At the time that the Constitution was written.
the Founders cou ld only hope that an orderly transfer of power from one pres ident to the next wou ld
occur. France h ad just undergo ne a bloody revolution: En gland in the not-tao-distant past had beheaded a kin g: and in Poland the rul er was elected by a
process so manifestly corrupt and so open to intrigue
that Thomas Jefferson. in what may be the first
exa mple of ethnic humor in American politics. was
led to refer to the proposed American presiden cy as a
"bad edition of a Polish king,"
Yet by the time Abraham Lincoln found himself at
th e helm of a nation plunged into a bitter. bloody

civil war. l'ifteen preside nts had been elected. served
their time. and left office without a hint of force heing
u sed to fa cilitate the process a nd with the people
accepting the process- if not admirin g all th e presidents. This ord erly transfer of authority occur red
despite passionate opposition cllld deeply divisive
e lection s (such as that whi ch brought Jefferson to
power). And it did not happen by accident.

The First Presidents
Those who first served as pres ident were among the
most prominent men in the new nation. a ll active
eith er in the movement for independence or in th e
Founding or in both. Of the l'irst five preSidents. four
(a ll butJohn Adams) served two full terms. Washington a nd Monroe were not even opposed. The first
adm ini stration had at the high est levels the leading
spokesmen for all of the major viewpoints: Alexa nder Hami lton was Washington's secreta ry of the
treasury (a nd was sy mpath etic to the urban commercia l interests). and Thom as Jefferson was secretary of state (a nd more inclin ed toward rural.
small-town. and farming views). Washington spoke
out strongly aga in st political parties. and though
parti es soo n emerged . there was a stigma attached to
t hem: many people believed that it was wrong to take
advantage of divisions in the co untry. to organize
deliberately to acquire political office. or to make leg-

Amerim has witness('(/ peaceflll transfers of power not onl!! between leaders of different parties
(such as Woodrow Wilsol1 and Willimn Howard Taft in 191 3) . bllt also ajter a papillar leader has
been assassinated (Lyndon Johnsol1 is slVorn ill after John F. Kennedy's death) .

Tile Evolution of tile Presidency
islation depend upon party advantage. As it turned
out. this hostility to party (or "faction ." as it wa s
more commonly called) was unrealistic: parties are
as natural to democracy as churches are to religion.
Establishing the legitima cy of the presidency in
the ea rly years was made easier by the fact that the
national government had relatively little to do . It
had , of course, to establish a sound currency and to
settle the debt accrued durin g the Revo lutionClry
WClr. The Treasury Department inevitably beca me
the prin cipal federal office, . especia lly und er the
strong leadership of Ha milton. Relations with England and France were important- and difficult- but
ot herw ise government took littl e time and few
resources.
In appointin g people to federa l office, a general
rule of "fitness" emerged: those appOinted should
have some standing in their communities and be well
thought of by their neighbors. Appointments based
on partisanship soon arose, but community stature
could not be neglected.
The presidency was kept modest. Washington
clearly had not sought the offtce a nd did not relish the
exercise of its then modest powers. He traveled widely
so that as many people as possible could see th eir new
president. His efforts to estClbli sh a semirega l court etiquette were quickly rebuffed ; the presidency was to be
kept simple. Congress decided that not until Clfter a
president was dead mi ght hi s likeness appear on a
coin or on currency; no president until Eisenhower
was given a pension on his retirement.
The president's relations with Co ngress were correct but not close. Washington appeared before the
Senate to ask its advice on a proposed treaty with
some Indian tribes. He got none a nd instead was
politely told that the Senate wou ld like to consider
th e matter in private. He declared that he would be
"da mned if he ever went there again." and he never
did. Thu s ended the responsibi lity of the Senate to
"advise" the president. Vetoes were sometimes cast
by the president, but sparingly, and only when the
pres id ent believed that the law was not simply
un wise bu t unconstitutional. Washin gton cast only
two vetoes: Jefferson and Adams C<lst none.

The]acksonians
At a ('im e roughly co rrespondin g to the presidency of
Andrew Jac kso n (1829- 1837). hroad c ha nges
hega n to occur in Ameri ca n politics. These changes.
together with the personality of Jackson himself.

375

President Andrew Jackson thought of himself as the "Tribune of
the People," and he symbolized this by throwing a Wh ite Hou se
party that anyone cOlild attend. Hundreds of people showed up
and ate or carried away most of a 1.400-pollnd block of cheese.

altered the relations between president a nd Congress
a nd the nature of presidential leadership. As so often
happens. few people at the time Jackson took office
had mu ch sense of what his presidency would be like.
Though he had been a member of the House of Representa tives a nd of the Senate, he was elected as a
military hero- a nd a n apparently doddering one at
that. Sixty-one years old and seemin gly fra il. he
nonetheless used the powers of his offtce as no one
before him had.
Jackson vetoed twelve acts of Congress, more than
a ll hi s predecessor s combined and more than any
subsequent president until Andrew Johnson thirty
yea rs later. His vetoes were not simply on constitutiona l grounds but on policy ones: as the only official
elected by the entire voting citizenry, he saw himself
as the "Tribune of the People. " None of his vetoes
were overridden. He did not initiate many new policies. but he struck out against the ones that he did
not like. He did so at a time when the size of the electorate was increasing rapidly, and new states, especia lly in the West. had entered th e Union . (There
were then twenty-four states in the Union, nea rly
twice the origin a l number. )
Jackso n demonstrated what cou ld he don e by a
popul ar president. He did not shrink from conflict
with Co ngress. and the tension between th e two
bra nches of government that was intended by the

376

Chapter 1 4

The Presidency

HOW THINGS WORK
The Electoral College
Until November 2000, it was almost impossible to get
a student interested in the electoral college . But in
the 2000 presidential election Florida's electoral vote
hung in the balance for weeks, with Bush finally winning it and (though he had fewer popular votes than
AI Gore) the presidency.
Here are the essential facts: Each state gets electoral votes equal to the number of its senators and
representatives (the District of Columb ia also gets 3,
even though it has no representatives in Congress).
There are 538 electoral votes. To win, a candidate
must receive at least half, or 270.
In all but two states, the candidate who wins the
most popular votes wins all of the state's electoral
votes. Maine and Nebraska have a different system.
They allow electoral votes to be split by awarding
some votes on the basis of a candidate's statewide
total and some on the basis of how the candidate did
in each congressional district.
The winning slates of electors assemble in their
state capitals about six weeks after the election to
cast their ballots. Ordinarily this is a pure formality.
Occasionally, however, an elector will vote for a presidential candidate other than the one who carried
the state. Such "faithless electors" have appeared in
several elections since 1796. The state electoral ballots are opened and counted before a joint session of
Congress during the first week of January. The candidate with a majority is declared elected .
If no candidate wins a majority, the House of Representatives chooses the president from among the
three leading candidates, with each state casting one
vote. By House rules, each state's vote is allotted to
the candidate preferred by a majority of the state's
House delegation . If there is a tie within a delegation, that state's vote is not counted .

Framers beca m e in tens ifi ed by the per sona lities of
those in governm ent: Ja ckson in the W hite House,
and Henry Clay, Dan iel Webster. and John Ca lh oun
i n Congress. T hese powerru l !1gures wa lked the po li tica l stage at a time when bitter sectiona l conrJictsover slavery and commerci al pol icies- were be-

The House has had to decide two presidential contests. In 1800 Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr tied in
the electora l college because of a defect in the language of the Constitution- each state cast two electoral votes, without indicating which was for president
and which for vice president. (Burr was supposed to be
vice president, and after much maneuvering he was.)
This problem was corrected by the Twelfth Amend ment, ratified in 1804. The only House decision under
the modern system was in 1824, when it chose John
Quincy Adams over Andrew Jackson and William H.
Crawford, even though Jackson had more electoral
votes (and probably more popular votes) than his rivals.
Today the w inner-take-all system in effect in
forty-eight states makes it possible for a candidate to
win at least 270 electoral votes without winning a
majority of the popular votes . This happened in
2000, 1888, and 1876, and almost happened in 1960
and 1884. Today a candidate who carries the ten
largest states wins 256 electoral votes, only 14 short
of a presidential victory.
This means that the candidates have a strong
incentive to campaign hard in big states they have a
chance of winning . In 2000, Gore worked hard in Cal ifornia, New York, and Pennsylvania but pretty much
ignored Texas, where Bush was a shoo-in . Bush campaigned hard in Florida, Illinois, and Ohio, but not so
much in New York, where Gore was an easy winner.
But the electoral college can also help small states.
South Dakota, for example, has 3 electoral votes
(about 0.5 percent of the total), even though it casts
only about 0.3 percent of the popu lar vote . South
Dakota and other small states are thus overrepresented in the electoral college .
Most Americans would li ke to abolish the electoral
college . But doing away with it entirely would have

ginn in g to sp li t the co u ntry. Jackso n, though he
was opposed to a large and powerfu l federa l governm ent and wished to return so meh ow to the agra r ian
simpliciti es of Jeffer so n 's time. was non eth eless a
believer in a strong and independent pres idency. T his
view, though obscured by nearly a century of subse-

The Evolution of the Presidency

377

Electoral Votes per State

AZ 5

10

.- o

~Q

HAWAII
4

l'I

TX
34

LA

MS

AL

6

9

9

v

Note: States drawn in proport ion
to number of electoral votes .
Total electoral votes : 538

ALASKA

3

some unforeseen effects. If we relied just on the popular vote, there would have to be a runoff election
among the two leading candidates if neither got a
majority because third-party candidates won a lot of
votes. This would encourage the formation of third
parties (we might have a Jesse Jackson party, a Pat
Buchanan party, a Pat Robertson party, and a Ralph
Nader party). Each third party would then be in a
position to negotiate with one of the two major parties between the first election and the runoff about
favors it wanted in return for its support. American
presidential politics might come to look like the multiparty systems in France and Italy.

quent congressional dominance of national politics,
was ultimately to triumph- for better or for worse.

The Reemergence of Congress
With the end of Jackson's second term, Congress
quickly reestablished its power, and except for the

There are other changes that could be made . One
is for each state to allocate its electoral votes proportional to the popular vote the candidates receive
in that state. Voters in Colorado acted on that measure in November 2004, but that proposal failed . If
every state d id that, several past elections would
have been decided in the House of Representatives
because no candidate got a majority of the popular
vote.
And the electoral college serves a larger purpose:
it makes candidates worry about carrying states as
well as popular votes, and so heightens the influence
of states in national politics.

wartime presidency of Linco ln and brief flashes of
presidential power under James Polk (1845-1849)
and Grover Cleveland (1885- 1889, 1893- 1897),
the presidency for a hundred years was the subordinate branch of the national government. Of the
eight preSidents who succeeded Jackson, two

378

Chapter 14

Th e Pres idency

(Willi a m H. Harrison and Zachary Tay lor) died in
office. a nd none of the others served more than one
term. Schoolchildren. try ing to memorize the list of
American presidents, always stu mbl e in this era of
the "no-name " pres idents. Thi s is hardly a co incidence: Congress was the leading institution , struggling, un successfu lly, with slavery and sectionalism.
It was also an in tensely pa rti sa n era, a legacy of
Ja ckson that lasted well into the twentieth century.
Public opinion was closely divided. In nin e of the
seventeen presidentia l elections between the end of
Jackson 's term in 1837 and Theodore Roosevelt's
election in 1904, the winning candidate received
less th an half the popul ar vote. Only two candidates
(Lincoln in 1864 and Ulysses S. Grant in 1872) received more than 55 percent of the popular vote.
During this long period of congressional-and
usually senatorial- dominance of national government, only Lincoln broke new ground for presidentia l power. Lincoln's expansive use of that power, like
Jackson 's, was totally unexpected. He was first elected in 1860 as a m inor ity president, receiving less
tha n 40 percen t of the popul ar vote in a field of four
cand id ates. Though a member of the new Republican party, he had been a mem ber of the Whig party,
a grou p th at had stood for limitin g presidentia l
power. He had opposed America's entry into the
Mexican War and had been criti ca l of Jackson 's use
of executive authority. But as pres ident during the
Civil War, he made unprecedented use of the vague
gift of powers in Article II of the Constitution, especially those that he felt were "implied" or "inherent"
in the phrase ··take care that the laws be faithfully
executed" and in the express authorization for him to
act as commander in chief. Lincoln raised an army,
spent money, blockaded so uthern ports, temporarily
suspended the writ of habeas corpus, and issued the
Ema ncipation Proclamation to free the slaves- all
without prior congressional approval. He justified
this, as most Americans probably would have, by the
emergency conditions created by civil war. In this he
acted little differently from Thomas Jefferson , who
while president waged undeclared war against various North African pirates.
After Lin coln, Congress reasserted its power and
became, during Reconstru ction a nd for many decades
thereafter, the prinCipa l federa l institution. But it had
become abundantly clear that a national emergency
co uld equip the president with great powers and that
a popu lar and strong-w illed president could expand
his powers even without an emergency.

Except for the a dmini strations of Theodore
Roosevelt (1901 - 1909) a nd Woodrow Wilson
(1913- 1921), the president was , until the New Deal,
at best a negative force- a so urce of opposition to
Co ngress. not a source of initiative a nd lea dership for
it. Grover Clevela nd was a stro ng personality, but for
a ll his efforts he was able to do little more than veto
bills that he did not like. He cast 4 14 vetoes- more
than any other president until Franklin Roosevelt. A
freq uent target of his vetoes were bills to confer specia l pensions on Civil War veterans.
Today we are accustomed to thinking that the
president formulates a legislative program to which
Congress then responds, but until the 19 30s the
oppos ite was more the case. Congress ignored the initiatives of su ch presiden ts as Grover Cleveland,
Ru therford Hayes, Chester Arthur, and Calvin
Coolid ge. Woodrow Wilson in 19 13 was the first
president si nce John Adams to deliver personally the
State of the Union address, and he was one of the
flrst to develop and ar gue for a presidential legislative
program.
Our popular conception of the president as the
centra l figure of national government, devising a legislative program and command in g a la rge sta ff of
adv isers. is very much a produ ct of the modern era
a nd of the enl arged role of govern ment. In th e past
the pres id ency became power ful o n ly during a
nationa l crisis (the Civ il War, Wo rld War I) or because
of a n extraordinar y perso na lity (Andrew Jackson,
Theodore Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson). Since the
1930s, however, the presidency has been powerful no
matter who occupied the office and whether or not
there was a crisis. Because government now plays
such an active role in our national life, the president is
the natural focus of attention and the titular head of
a huge federal administrative system (whether he is
the real boss is another matter).
But the popular conception of the president as the
centra l figure of nationa l government belies the realiti es of present-day legislative-executive relations.
During national policy-making from the Eisenhower
years through th e Reagan administration, Congress,
not the president, often took the lead in setting the
legislative agenda. 5 For example, the 1990 Clea n Air
Act, like the 1970 Clea n Air Act before it, was born
a nd bred mainly by congressiona l, not pres identia l,
action. Indeed, administration ofTi cia ls played a lmost
no role in the legislative process that culminated in
these laws. 6 When President Bush signed the 1990
Clea n Air Act or President Clinton signed the 1996

The Powers of the President
Welfare Reform Act, each took credit for it, but in fact
both bills were designed by members of Congress,
not by the president. 7 Likewise, although pres id ents
dominated budget policy-making from the 192 0s
into the early 1970s, they no longer do. Instead, the
"imperatives of the budgetary process have pu shed
congressional leaders to center stage."8 Thus, as
often as not, Co ngress proposes, the president disposes, and legislative-executive relations involve h ard
bargaining and struggle between these two bran ches
of government.

The Powers of the President
Though the pres id ent, unlike a prime minister, cannot command an automatic majority in the legislature, he does have some formid able, albeit vagu ely
defined , powers. These are mostly set forth in Article
II of the Constitution and are of two sorts: those he
can exercise in his own right without formal legislative approva l, and those that require the consent of
the Senate or of Congress as a who le.
•

president who is chief clerk of the country. A hundred years after the Founding, that is about how matters appeared to even the most astute observers. In
1884 Woodrow Wilson wrote a book about American politics titled Congressional Government, in wh ich
he described the business of the president as "usually not much above routine," mostly "mere administration ." The president might as well be an officer of
the civil service. To su cceed, he need only obey Congress and stay alive.9
But even as Wilson wrote, he was overlooking
some examples of enormously powerful presidents,
such as Lincoln, and was not suffiCiently attentive to
the potential for presidential power to be found in the
more ambiguous clauses of the Constitution as well
as in the political realities of American life. The
president's authority as commander in chi ef has

Powers of the President Alone

• Serve as commander in chief of the armed forces
• Commission officers of the armed forces
• Grant reprieves and pardons for federal offenses
(except impeachment)
• Convene Co ngress in special sessions
• Receive ambassadors
• Take care that the laws be faithfully executed
• Wield the "executive power"
• Appoint officials to lesser offices
• Powers of the President That Are Shared with
the Senate

• Make treaties
• Appo int ambassadors, judges, and high officials
• Powers of the President That Are Shared with
Congress as a Whole

• Approve legislation
Taken alone and interpreted narrowly, this list of
powers is not very impressive. Obv iously the president's authority as commander in chief is important,
but literally construed, most of the other constitutional grants seem to provide for little more than a

A military ojficer carrying "the foot ball." the briefcase
containing the secret codes the president m n use to launch
a nuclear attack.

379

380

Chapter 14

The Presidency

HOW THINGS WORK

The President: Qualifications and Benefits
Qualifications

• A natural-born citizen (can be born abroad of parents who are American citizens)
• Thirty-five years of age
• A resident of the United States for at least fourteen years (but not necessarily the fourteen years
just preceding the election)
Benefits

• A nice house
• A salary of $400,000 per year (taxable)

grown-especially, but not only, in wartime- to
encompass not simply the direction of the military
forces, but also the managemen t of the economy and
the direction of foreign affairs as welL A quietly dramatic reminder of the awesome implications of the
presiden t's military powers occurs at the precise
instant that a new president assumes office, An army
officer ca rrying a locked briefcase moves from the
side of the outgoing president to the side of the new
one, In the briefcase are the secret codes and orders
th at permit the president to authorize the launching
of American nuclear weapons,
The president's duty to "take care that the laws be
faithfully executed" has become one of the most elastic phrases in the Constitution. By interpreting this
broadly, Grover Cleveland was able to use federal
troops to break a labor strike in the 189 0s, and
Dwight Eisenhower was able to send troops to help
integrate a public school in Little Rock, Arkansas, in
1957.
The greatest source of presidential power, however, is not found in the Constitution at all but in politics and public opinion. Increasingly since the
19 30s, Congress has passed laws that confer on the
executive branch broad grants of authority to
achieve some general goals, leaving it up to the president and his depu ties to define the regulations and
programs that will actually be pu t into effect. In

• An expense account of $50,000 per year (tax-free)
• Travel expenses of $100,000 per year (tax-free)
• A pension, on retirement, equal to the pay of a
cabinet member (taxable)
• Staff support and Secret Service protection on
leaving the presidency
• A White House staff of 400 to 500 persons
• A p lace in the country-Camp David
• A personal airplane-Air Force One
• A fine chef

Chapter 1 5 we shall see how this delegation of legislative power to the president has contributed to the
growth of the bureaucracy. Moreover, the American
people-always in times of crisis, but increasingly as
an everyday matter- look to the pres ident for leadership and hold him responsible for a large and growing portion of our national affairs. The public thinks ,
wrongly, that the presidency is the "first branch" of
government.

The Office of the President
It was not until 1857 that the president was allowed

to have a private secretary paid for with public funds,
and it was not until after the assassination of Presiden t McKinley in 1901 that the president was given
a Secret Service bodyguard. He was not able to submit a single presidential budget until after 1921,
when the Budget and Accounting Act was passed
and the Bureau of the Budget (now called the Offi ce
of Management and Budget) was created. Grover
Cleveland personally answered the White House telephone, and Abraham Lincoln often answered his
own mail.
Today, of course, the presiden t has hundreds of
people assisting him, and the trappings of powerhelicopters, guards, limousines- are plainly visible.

Th e OjJice of the President
The White House staff has grown enormously. (Just
how big the staff is. no one knows . Presidents like to
pretend that the White House is not the large
bureaucracy that it in fact ha s become.) Add to this
the opportunities for presid ential appoin tments to
the cabinet. the courts, a nd various agencies, and the
resources at the disposa l of the president wou ld
appear to be awesome. That conclusion is partly true
and partly false. or at least misleadin g, a nd for a simple reason. If the president was once helpless for lack
of assistance, he now co nfronts an a rmy of assistants so large that it co nslitutes a bureaucracy th at
he has difficul ty contro llin g (see Figure 14.1).
The abi lity of a presidential assistant to affect the
president is governed by the rule of propinquity: in
genera l, power is wielded by people wh o are in the
roo m when a decision is made. Presid ential appointments can thu s be classified in terms of their proximity, physica l a nd poli tica l. to the president. There are
three degrees of propinqui ty: the White House Office,
the Executive Office. and the cabinet.

The White House Office
The president's closest assistants have offices in the
White House, usually in the West Wing of that building. Their titles often do not reveal the functions that
they actually perform: "counsel," "co unselor,"
"assistant to the president, " "special assista nt," "special consultant," and so forth. The actua l tilles vary
from one administration to a nother. but in genera l
the men and women who hold them oversee the
political and policy interests of the president. As part
of the president's perso na l staff. th ese aides do not
have to be confirmed by the Senate; the president can
hire and fire them at wi ll. In 2001 the Bush White
House had four hundred staff members and a budget of $35.4 million.
There are essentially three ways in wh ich a president can organize his personal staff- through the
"pyramid ." "Circular," a nd "ad hoc" methods. In a
pyramid structure. used by Eisenhower. Nixon.
Reagan, Bush, and (a fter a while) Clinton . most assistants report through a hierarchy to a chief of staff,
who then deals directly with the president. In a circular structure, used by Carter, cabinet secretaries
a nd assistants report directly to the president. In a n
ad hoc structure. used for a while by Pres ident Clinton, task forces, committees, a nd informal groups of
friends a nd advisers dea l directly with the president.
For example. the Clinton administration's hea lth care

Figure 14.1

-

381

Growth of the White House Staff,
1945- 2002
White House office

-

Total of Executive Office

5,000
4,000

:§
V1

<1J

V1

::l
0

3.000

I

.~ 2,000

.c

:;::

1,000

1945

1955

1965

1975

1985

1995

2005

Note: Executive Office includes White House Office plus Office of Management and Budget, Council of Economic Advisers, National Security

Council, Office of Science and Technology. Office of Adm inistration,
Spec ial Representative for Trade Negotiations, and Domestic Council.
Source: Harold W. Stanley and Richard G. Niemi, Vital Statistics on American Politics, 2003-2004. (Wash ington, D.c. : Congressional Quarterly
Press. 2003), 254- 255.

policy planning was spearheaded not by Hea lth a nd
Human Services secretary Donna E. Shalala, but
by First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and a White
House adviser. Ira Magaziner. Likewise, its initiative to
reform the federal bureaucracy (the National Performance Review) was led not by Office of Management
and Budget director Leon E. Pa netta. but by an adviser to Vice President Gore. Ela in e Kamarck. ] II
It is common for presidents to mix methods; for
example, Franklin Roosevelt alternated between the
circular and ad hoc methods in the conduct of his
domestic policy and sometimes employed a pyramid

pyramid structure A president's subord inates
report to him through a clear chain of command headed by a chief of staff.
circular structure Several of the president's
assistants report directly to him .
ad hoc structure Several subordinates, cabinet officers, and committees report directly to
the president on different matters.

382

Chapter .14

The Presidenc!J

HOW THINGS WORK

The Myth and Reality of the White House Office
The Myth
The White House Office was created in the 1930s following recommendations made by the President's
Commission on Administrative Management. The
principles underlying those recommendations have
been endorsed by almost every presidential chief of
staff since then . The key ones are:
1. Small is beautiful. The presidential staff should

be small. At first there were only six assistants.
2. A passion for anonymity The president's person-

al assistants should stay out of the limelight.
3. Honest brokers. The presidential staff should not

make decisions for the president; it should only coordinate the flow of information to the president.
The Reality
Increasingly the operations of the White House
Office seem to reflect almost the exact opposite of
these principles.

(under Nixon and Ford), H. R. Haldeman (under
Nixon), Hamilton Jordan (under Carter), Howard
Baker (under Reagan), George Stephanopoulos
(under Clinton), and Karl Rove (under G.W. Bush).
3. Be in charge. Cabinet officers regularly complain that White House staffers are shutting
them out and making all the important decisions. Congressional investigations have revealed
the power of such White House aides as Haldeman, John Poindexter, and Lieutenant Colonel
Oliver North.
Why the Gap Between Myth and Reality?
The answer is-the people and the government. The
people expect much more from presidents today; no
president can afford to say, "We're too busy here to
worry about that." The government is much more
complex, and so leadership requires more resources .
Even conservatives such as Ronald Reagan have been
activist presidents.

1. Big is better. The White House staff has grown

enormously in size. Hundreds now work there.
2. Get out front. Key White House staffers have

become

household

words-Henry

Kissinger

structure when dea lin g with foreign a ffairs and military policy. Taken individu ally, each method of organization has adva ntages and di sadva ntages. A pyramid
structure provides for a n orderly flow of information
and decisions, but does so at the risk of isolating or misinforming the president. The circular method has the
virtue of giving the president a great dea l of information, but at the price of confu sion and conflict among
cabinet secretaries and assistants. An ad hoc structure
allows great flexibility, minimizes bureaucratic inertia.
and generates ideas and informa ti on from disparate
ch a nnels. but it risks cutting the president off from the
government officials who are ultimately responsible
for translating presidential decisions into policy proposa ls and administrative action.

Source: Adapted from Samuel Kernell and Samuel l. Popkin, eds.,
Chief of Staff (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986),
193- 232 .

All preS ide nts claim that they are open to many
sources of adv ice. and some preSidents try to guarantee that openness by usin g the circular method of
staff orga ni za tion. President Ca rter liked to describe
his offi ce as a wheel with him self as the hub and his
several assistants as spokes. But most presidents discover. as did Carter. that the difficulty of managing
the large White Hou se burea ucracy and of conserving th eir own limited supply of tim e and energy
makes it necessary for them to rely heavily on one or
two key subordinates. Carter. in July 1979. dramatica lly altered the White Hou se sta ff organ ization by
elevatin g Hamilton Jordan to th e post of chi ef of
sta fr. w ith the job of coordinating th e work of th e
other staff assistants.

The Ojfice oj the President
At first. President Reagan adopted a compromise
between the circle and the pyramid. putting the
White House under the direction of three key aides.
At the beginning of his second term in 1985. however. the president shifted to a pyramid. placing all
his assistants under a single chief of staff. Clinton
began with an ad hoc system and then changed to
one more like a pyramid. Each assistant has, of
course. others working for him or her. sometimes a
large number. There are. at a slightly lower level of
status, "special assistants to the president" for various purposes. (Being "special" means. paradoxically.
being less important.)
Typically sen ior White House staff members are
drawn from the ranks of the president's campaign
staff- longtime associates in whom he has confidence. A few members. however. will be experts
brought in after the campaign: such was the case, for
example, with Henry Kissinger, a former Harvard
professor who became President Nixon 's assistant for
national security affairs. The offices that these men
and women occupy are often small and crowded
(Kissinger's was not much bigger than the one that
he had while a professor at Harvard). but their occupants willingly put up with any discomfort in
exchange for the privilege (and the power) of being ill
the White House. The arrangement of offices- their
size. and especially their proximity to the president's
Oval Oflke- is a good measure of the relative influence of the people in them.
To an outsider. the amount of jockeying among
the top staff for access to the president may seem
comical or even perverse. The staff attaches enormous significance to whose office is closest to the
president's. who can see him on a daily as opposed to
a weekly basis. who can get an appointment with the
president and who cannot. and who has a right to see
documents and memoranda just before they go to the
Oval Office. To be sure. there is ample grist here for
Washington political novels. But there is also something important at stake: it is not simply a question of
power plays and ego trips. Who can see the president
and who sees and "signs off " on memoranda going to
the president affect in important ways who influences policy and thus whose goals and beliefs become
embedded in policy.
For example, if a memo from a secretary of the
treasury who believes in free trade can go directly to
the president. the president may be more likely to
support free trade (low tariffs). On the other hand. if

that memo must be routed through the office of the
assistant to the president for political affairs. who is
worried about the adverse effects of foreign competition on jobs in the American steel industry because
the votes of steelworkers are important to the president's reelection campaign. then the president may
be led to support higher tariffs.

The Executive Office of the President
Agencies in the Executive Office report directly to the
president and perform staff services for him but are
not located in the White House itself. Their members
mayor may not enjoy intimate contact with him;
some agencies are rather large bureaucracies. The
top positions in these organizations are filled by presidential appointment. but unlike the White House
staff positions. these appointments must be confirmed by the Senate.
The principal agencies in the Executive Office are:
•
•
•
•
•

Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
Director of National Intelligence (DNI)
Council of Economic Advisers (CEA)
Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
Office of the U.S. Trade Representative

Of all the agencies in the Executive Office of the
President, perhaps the most important in terms of
the president's need for assistance in administering
the federal government is the Office of Management
and Budget. First called the Bureau of the Budget
when it was created in 1921. it became OMB in 1970
to reflect its broader responsibilities. Today it does
conSiderably more than assemble and analyze the
figures that go each year into the national budget
that the president submits to Congress. It also studies the organization and operations of the executive
branch . devises plans for reorganizing various departments and agencies. develops ways of getting
better information about government programs. and
reviews proposals that cabinet departments want
included in the president's legislative program.
OMB has a staff of over five hundred people,
almost all career civil servants. many of high professiona l skill and substantial experience. Traditionally
OMB has been a nonpartisan agency- experts serving all presidents, without regard to party or ideology. In recent administrations. however. OMB has
played a major role in advocating policies rather than
merely analyzing them. David Stockman. President
Reagan's OMB director. was the primary architect of

383

384

Chapter 14

The Presidency

the 1981 and 1985 budget cuts that were proposed
by the president and enacted by Congress. Stockman's proposals were often adopted over the objections of the affected department heads.

The Cabinet
The cabinet is a product of tradition and hope. At
one time the heads of the federal departments met
regularly with the president to discuss matters, and
some people, especially those critical of strong presidents, would like to see this kind of co ll egia l decisionmak ing reestablished. But in fact this role of the
cabinet is largely a fi ction. Indeed. the Constitution
does not even mention the cabinet (though the
Twenty-fifth Amendment implicitly defines it as consisting of "the principa l offices of the executive
departments") . When Washington tried to get his
cabinet members to work together, its two strongest
members- Alexander Ha milton and Thomas Jefferson-spent most of their time feuding. The cabinet.
as a presidential committee, did not work any better
for John Adams or Abraham Lincoln, for Frank li n
Roosevelt or John Kennedy. Dwight Eisenhower is
alm ost the only modern president who came close to
making the cabinet a truly deliberative body: he gave
it a large staff, held regular meetings. and li stened
to opinions expressed there. But even under Eisenhower, the cabinet did not have much influence over
presidential decisions, nor did it help him ga in more
power over the gover nment.
By custom, cabinet officers are the heads of the
fiftee n major executive departments. These departments. together with the dates of their creation and
the approximate number of their employees, are
given in Tabl e 14.1. The order of their creation is
unimportant except in terms of protocol: where one
sits at cabinet meetin gs is determined by the age of
the department that one heads. Thus the secretary of
state sits next to the president on one side and the
secretary of the treasury next to him on the other.
Down at the foot of the tab le are found the heads of
the newer departments.
The president appo ints or directly controls vastly
more members of his cabinet departments than does
the British prime minister (see Table 14.2). The rea-

cabinet

The heads of the fifteen executive
branch departments of the federal government.

Table 14.1

Department
State
Treasury
Defense'
Justice
Interior
Agriculture b
Commerce
Labor
Health and Human
Services'
Housing and Urban
Development
Transportation
Energy
Education
Vete ra ns Affairs
Homeland Secu rity

Departments

Created

Approximate
Employment
(2000)

1789
1789
1947
1789
1849
1889
1913
1913
1953

27,000
142,700
673,500
126,300
68,000
99,300
45,000
16,100
62,700

1965

10,300

1966
1977
1979
1989
2002

63,900
15,700
4,700
220,200
180,000

"Formerly the War Department. created in 1789. Figures are for
civilians only.
bAgriculture Department created in 1862; made part of cabinet
in 1889.
(Originally Health, Education and Welfare; reorganized in 1979.
Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2003, Table 500,

and data from the Department of Homeland Security.

son is sim ple: the president must struggle with Congress for co ntrol of tbese agencies, while the prime
minister bas no rival branch of government that
seeks th is power. Presidents get more appointments
than do prime ministers to make up for wbat the separation of powers denies them.
This abundance of politi ca l appointments, however, does not give the president amp le power over
the departments. The secretary of Health and
Human Ser vices (HHS) reports to the president and
has a few hundred political appoin tees to assist him
or her in responding to the pres ident's wishes. But
the secretary of HHS heads a n agency with over
65,000 employees, 11 operating divi sions. hundreds
of grant-making programs, and a bud get of more
than $460 billion. Likewise. the secretary of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) spends most of
his or her time on departmental business and vastly
less on talking to the pres ident. It is hard ly su rprising
that the secretary is largely a representative of HUD

Who Gets Appo in ted

Table 14.2

. '.
•

a

....

...

Department
Agr iculture
Commerce
Defense
Education
Energy
Health and Human Servi ces
Housing an d Urban Deve lopment
Interior
Justi ce
State
Tra nsportat ion
Treasu ry
Vet era ns Affairs

Political
Appointees *

412
22 1
601

205
44 1
333
142
228
459
453
248
204
319

Note: Department of Homeland Security is omitted for lack of
data.

* All noncompetitive appointments.
Source: Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Policy and Supporting Positions, November 8, 2000.

to the president than his representative to HUD. And
no one should be surprised that the secretary of HUD
rarely finds much to talk about with the secretary of
defense at cabinet meetings.
Having the power to make these appointments
does give the president one great advantage: he has a
lot of opportunities to reward friends and political
supporters. In the Education Department, for example, President Clinton found jobs for onetime mayors,
senators, state legislators, and campa ign aides.

Independent Agencies, Commissions,
and]udgeships
The president also appoints people to four dozen or so
agencies and commissions that are not considered
part of the cabinet and that by law often have a quasiindependent status. The difference between an "executive" and an "independent" agency is not precise. In
general. it means that the heads of executive agencies
serve at the pleasure of the president and can be
removed at his discretion. On the other hand , the
heads of many independent agencies serve for fixed
terms of office and can be removed only "for cause."

The president can also appoint federa l judges, subject to the consent of the Senate. Judges serve for life
unless they are removed by impeachment and conviction. The reason for the special barriers to the
removal of judges is that they represent an independent branch of government as defined by the
Constitution, and limits on pres idential removal
powers are necessary to preserve that independence.
One new feature of appointing top government
officials is the increasing use of "acting" appointments. An acting appointee holds office until the
Senate acts on his or her nomination. In 1998 acting
officials held one-fifth of all of the Clinton administration's cabinet-level (or subcabinet-Ievel)* jobs.
Some were in office for many months. Many senators feel that this violates their right to consent to
appointments and in particular violates the Vacancies Act passed in 1868. That law limits acting
appointees to 120 days in office. If the Senate takes
no action during those 120 days, the acting official
may stay in office until he or she, or someone else,
is confirmed for the post. Administration officials
defend the practice as necessary given the slow pace
of confirmations; senators attack it as an opportunity for a president to fill up his administration with
unconfirmed officials.

"*

Who Gets Appointed

As we have seen, a president can make a lot of
appointments, but he rarely knows more than a few
of the people whom he does appoint.
Unlike cabinet members in a parliamentary system, the preSident's cabinet officers and their principal deputies usually have not served with the chief
executive in the legislature. Instead they come from
private business, universities, "think tanks," foundations, law firms, labor unions, and the ranks of former and present members of Congress as well as past
state and local government officials. A president is
fortunate if most cabinet members turn out to agree
with him on major policy questions. President Reagan made a special effort to ensure that his cabinet
members were ideologically in tune with him, but
even so Secretary of State Alexander Ha ig soon got

* Subcabinet refers to under secretary, deputy secreta ry,
and assista nt secreta ries in each cabinet department.

385

386

C/lapter 14

The Presiden cy

HOW THINGS WORK
Federal Agencies
The following agencies are classified by whether the president has unlimited or limited right of removal.
"Executive" Agencies
Head can be removed at any time .

"Independent" or "Quasi-Independent" Agencies
Members serve for a fixed term .

Action
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
Commission on Civil Rights
Energy Research and Development Agency
Environmental Protection Agency
Federal Mediation and Concil iation Service
General Services Administration
National A eronautics and Space Administration
Postal Servi ce
Small Business Admin istration
All cabin et departm ents
Executive Office of t he President

Federal Reserve Board (14 years)
Consumer Product Safety Commission (6 years)
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (5 years)
Federal Communications Commission (7 years)
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (6 years)
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (5 years)
Federal Maritime Commission (5 years)
Federal Trade Commission (7 years)
National Labor Relations Board (5 years)
National Science Foundation (6 years)
Securities and Exchange Commiss ion (5 years)
Tennessee Valley Authority (9 years)

into a series of quarrels with senior members of the
White House sta ff and had to res ign.
The men and women appointed to th e cabinet a nd
to the subcabinet will usua lly have had some prior
federa l experience. On e study of over a thousand
such appoin tments made by fi ve presid ents (Franldin
Roosevelt through Ly nd o n Jo hnso n) found that
about 85 percent of the cabinet, subcabinet, and
independ ent-agency appoin tees had some prior federa l experience. In fa ct, most were in government
se rvice (at the federal, state, or loca l levels) just
before th ey received their cabinet or su bcabinet
a ppointment. l l Clearly the executive branch is not,
in general, run by novices.
Ma ny of th ese appoin tees a re w hat Richa rd
eustadt has called "in-a nd-o uters": people who
a lternate between jobs in the federa l government a nd
ones in th e private sector, especia lly in law firm s a nd
in universities. Donald Rumsfeld, befo re becoming
secretary of defense to President George W. Bush,
had been secretary of defense a nd ch ief of staff
under President Ford and before that a member of
Co ngress. Between his Fo rd a nd Bush services, he

was a n executive in a large pharmaceutical compa ny. This pattern is quite different from that of parlia mentary systems, where a ll the cabinet officers
come from the legislature and a re typica lly full-time
career politicians.
At one time the cabinet had in it ma ny people with
strong political followings of their own- former senators a nd govern ors and powerfu l loca l party leaders.
Under Franklin Roosevelt. Truma n, and Kennedy, the
postmaster general was the president's campaign
manager. George Washingto n, Abra ham Lincoln, and
other presidents had to contend with cabinet mem bers
who were powerful figures in their own right: Alexander Ha mi lto n a nd Thomas Jefferson worked with
Washington; Simon Cameron (a Penn sylvania political boss) a nd Salmon P Ch ase (formerly governor
of Ohio) worked for-and against-Lincoln. Before
1824 the post of secretary of state was regarded as a
stepp ingstone to the presidency; and after that at least
ten persons ran for president who had been either secretary of state or ambassador to a foreign country. 12
Of late, however, a tendency has developed for
presidents to place in their cab inets peo pl e known for

Who Gets Appointed

Secretary oj Labor Frances Perkins (fejt) , appointed by President Franklin Roosevelt, was tile
first woman cabinet membeJ: When COlldo/eezza Rice was made secretary oj state by President
Busll , she became the first AJrican Americall womall to hold that key post.

their expertise or administrative experience rather
than for their political following. This is in part
because political parties are now so weak that party
leaders ca n no longer demand a place in the cabinet
and in part because presidents want (or think they
want) "experts." A remarkable illustration of this is
the number of people with Ph.D.'s who have entered
the cabinet. President ixon, who supposedly did not
like Harvard professors , appointed two-Henry
Kissinger and Daniel Patrick Moynihan-to important posts: Gera ld Ford added a third, John Dunlop.
A president's desire to appoint experts who do not
have independent political power is modified- but
not supplanted- by his need to recognize various
politically important groups, regions, and organizations. Since Robert Weaver became the first African
American to serve in the cabinet (as secretary of HlID
under President Johnson), it is clear that it would be
quite costly for a president not to have one or more
blacks in his cabinet. The secretary of labor must be
acceptable to the AFL-CIO, the secretary of agriculture to at least some organized farm ers. President
George W. Bush, like President Clinton. appointed
many women and minorities to his cab inet. Co lin
Powell became Bush's secretary of state and Con-

doleezza Rice, also an African American, his national
security adviser and later, his secretary of state.
Because political considerations must be taken
into account in making cabinet and agency appointments and because any head of a large organization
wi ll tend to adopt the perspective of that organization, there is an inevitable tension-even a rivalrybetween the White House staff and the department
heads. Staff members see themselves as extensions of
the president's personality and policies; department
heads see themselves as repositories of expert knowledge (often knowledge of why someth in g will not
work as the president hopes). White House staffers,
many of them young men and women in their twenties or early thirties with little executive experience,
will ca ll department heads, often persons in their
fifties with substantial executive experience, and tell
them that "the president wants" this or that or that
"the president asked me to tell you" one thing or
another. Department heads try to conceal their irritation and then maneuver for some delay so that
they ca n develop their own counterproposa ls. On the
other hand, when department heads ca ll a Wh ite
House staff person and ask to see the presid ent.
unless they are one of the privileged few in whom the

387

388

Chapter 14

The Presidency

T·R-I·V· I·A .
......................
Presidents
Only divorced president

Ronald Reagan

Only bachelor president

James Buchanan

Three presidents who died on
the Fourth of July

Thomas Jefferson (1826)
John Adams (1826)
James Monroe (1831)

The shortest presidential term

William Henry Harrison
(1 month)

The longest presidential term

Franklin D. Roosevelt
(12 years and 1 month)

The youngest president when
inaugurated

Theodore Roosevelt (42)

The oldest president when
inaugurated

Ronald Reagan (69)

First president born in a
hospital

Jimmy Carter

First presidential automobile

Owned by William Howard Taft

Only former presidents elected
to Congress

John Quincy Adams (to House)
and Andrew Johnson (to Senate)

Only president who never
attended school

Andrew Johnson

president h as special confidence, they are often told
that "the president can't be bothered with that" or
"the president doesn't have time to see you ."

"*

Presidential Character

Every president brings to th e White House a distinctive personality; the way the White House is organized and run will reflect that personality. Moreover,
the public will judge the president not only in terms
of what he accomplished, but also in terms of its perception of his character. Thus personality plays a
more important role in explaining the presidency
than it does in explaining Congress.
Dwight Eisenhower brought an orderly, military
style to the White House, He was accustomed to del-

egating authority and to having careful and co mplete staff work done for him by trained specialists .
Though critics often accused him of h aving a bumbli ng, incoherent manner of speaking, in fact mnch
of that was a public disguise-a strategy for avo iding
being pinned down in public on matters where he
wished to retain freedom of action. His private
papers reveal a very different Eisenhower- sharp,
precise, deliberate.
John Kennedy brou ght a very different sty le to the
presidency. He projected the image of a bold, articulate, and amusing leader who liked to surround himself with talented a mateurs . Instead of clear,
hierarchical lines of authority, there was a pattern of
persona l rule and an atmosp here of improvisation.
Kennedy did not hes itate to ca ll very junior subordinates directly and tell them what to do, bypassing the
chain of command.
Lyndon Johnson was a master legislative strategist
who h ad risen to be majority leader of the Senate on
the strength of his ability to persuade other politicians in face-to-face encounters. He was a consummate deal maker who, having been in Washington
for thirty years before becoming president. knew
everybody and everything. As a result he tried to
make every decision himself. But the style that served
him well in political negotiations did not serve him
well in speaking to the country at la rge, especially
when trying to retain public support for the war in
Vietnam.
Richard Nixon was a highly intelligent man with a
deep knowledge of and interest in foreign policy, coupled with a deep suspicion of the media, his political rivals, and the federal bureaucracy. In contrast
to Johnson, he disliked personal confrontations and
tended to shield himself behind an elaborate staff
system. Distrustful of the cabinet agencies, he tried
first to centralize power in the White House and then
to put into key cabinet posts former White House
aides loya l to him. Like Johnson, his personality
made it dimcu lt for him to mobilize popular support.
Eventually he was forced to resign under the threat of
impeachment arising out of his role in the Watergate
scandal.
Gera ld Ford, before being appointed vice president, h ad spent his politica l life in Congress and was
at home with the give-and-take, discussion-oriented
procedures of that body, He was also a genial man
who liked talking to people. Thus he preferred the circular to the pyramid system of Wh ite House organi-

Presidential Character
zation. But this meant that many decisions were
mad e in a disorganized fashion in which key people- and sometimes key problems- were not taken
into account.
Jimmy Carter was a n outsider to Washington and
boasted of it. A former Georgia governo r, he was
determined not to be "captured " by Washington
insid ers. He a lso was a voracious reader with a wide
range of interests and an appetite for detail. These
dispos itions led him to try to do many things and to
do them personally. Like Ford. he began with a circular structure; unlike Ford, he based his decisions on
read ing countless memos and asking detailed questions. His advisers finally decided that he was trying
to do too much in too great detail , and toward the
end of his term he shifted to a pyramid structure.
Ron ald Reagan was also an outsider, a fonner governor of California. But unlike Carter, he wanted to
set the broad directions of his administration and
leave the details to others. He gave wide latitude to
subordinates and to cabinet officers, within the
framework of an emphasis on lower taxes, less
domestic spending, a military buildup, and a tough
line with the Soviet Un ion. He was a superb leader of
public opinion. ea rning the nickname "The Great
Co mmunica tor. "
George H. W. Bush lacked Reagan's speak in g ski ll s
and was much more of a hands-on manager. Drawing on his extensive experience in the federal government (he had been vice president, director of the
CIA . ambassador to the United Nations, representative to China , and a member of the House), Bush
made decisions on the basis of persona l contacts
with key foreign leaders and Washington offic ia ls.
Bill Clinton, like Carter. paid a lot of attention to
public policy and preferred informal, ad hoc arrangements for running his office. Unlike Carter, he was an
effective speaker who could make a lmost any idea
sound plaUSible. He was elected as a centrist Democrat but immediately pursued liberal policies such as
comprehensive health insurance. When those failed
and the Republicans won contro l of Congress in
1994. Cli nton became a centrist again. His sexua l
affa irs became the object of major investigations,
and he was impeached by the House but acquitted by
the Senate.
George W. Bush. the forty-third president, entered
office as an outsider from Texas, but he was an outsider with a difference: his father had served as the
forty-first president of the Un ited States. his late

389

TI, ree presidellts- George H. W Busit, Bill Cli ll toll , alld Jilllll1Y
Carter- at a SLlllllllit to ellcourage volll ll teer activity.

paternal grandfather had served as a United States
senator from Connecticut. and he won the presidency only after the U.S. Supreme Court halted a recount
of ballots in Florid a, where his brother was governor.
During the campaign. he focused almost entirely on
domestic issues. especially cutting taxes and reforming education. A deeply religious man, he talked
open ly about how he had stopped excessive drinking
only after he had found God. He ran as a "compassionate conservative" concerned about America's
needy children and families. Bush, who had earned
an advanced degree in business administration from
Harvard. ran a very tight White House sh ip. insisting
that meetings run on time and that press contacts be
strictly contro lled. He turned ba ck public doubts
about his intell ect through self-deprecating humor.
Fo ll ow ing the terrorist attack on America on September 11. 2001, his agenda shifted a lmost entirely
to foreign and military affairs, the "wa r on terror,"
and the issue of homeland security.

Chapter 14

390

*"

The Presidency

The Power to Persuade

The sketchy constitutiona l powers given the president, combined with the lack of an assured leg islative majority. mea n that he must rely heavily on
persuasion if he is to accomplish much. Here the
Constitution gives him some advantages: he and
the v ice president are the only officials elected by the
whole nation, and he is the ceremonial head of state
as well as the chief executive of the government. The
president ca n use his national constituency and ceremonial duties to enlarge his power, but he must do
so quickly: the second half of his first term in office
will be devoted to running for reelection. especially if
h e fa ces opposition for his own party's nomination
(as was the case with Carter and Ford).

T he Three Audiences
The president's persuasive powers are a imed at three
audiences. The fir st. a nd often the most important, is
his Washington, D.C., audience of fellow politicians
and leaders. As Richard Neustadt points out in his
book Presidential Power. a president's rep uta tion
among his Washington colleagues is of great importance in affecting how much deference his views
receive and thus how much power he can wield. 13 If
a president is thought to be "smart." "sure of himself." "cool. " "on top of things." or "shrewd," and
thus "effective. " he will be effective. Franklin Roosevelt had that reputation. and so did Lyndon Johnson. at least for his first few years in office. Truman,
Ford, and Carter often did not have that reputation,
and they lost ground accordingly. Power. like beauty.
exists largely in the eye of the beholder.
A second audience is composed of party activists
and offlceholders outside Washington-the partisan
grassroots. These persons want the president to
exemplify their principles, trumpet their slogans.
appeal to their fears and hopes. and help them get
reelected. Since. as we explained in Chapter 9, partisan activists increasingly have an ideological orientation toward nationa l politics, these people will
expect ··their" president to make flre-and-brimstone

bully pulpit The president's use of his prestige
and visibility to guide or enthuse the American
publi c.

speeches that co nfirm in them a shared sense of purpose and. incidentally. help them ra ise money from
contributors to state and local campaigns.
The third audience is "the public." But of course
that a udience is really many publics. each with a different view or set of interests. A president on th e
campaign trail speaks boldly of what he will accomplish: a president in offi ce speaks quietly of the problems that must be overcome. Citizens are often
irritated at the apparent tendency of officeholders.
including the presid ent. to sound mealy-mouth ed
and equivocal. But it is easy to criticize the cooking
when you haven' t been the cook. A president learns
quickly that his every utterance will be scrutinized
closely by the media and by organized gro ups here
and abroad. and his errors of fact. judgment. timing.
or even inflection will be immediately and forcefully
pointed out. Given the risks of saying too much. it is
a wonder that presidents say anything at all.
Presidents have made fewer and fewer impromptu
remarks in the years since Franklin Roosevelt held
office and have instead relied more and more on prepared speeches from which political errors can be
removed in advance. Hoover and Roosevelt held six
or seven press conferences each month. but every
president from Nixon thro ugh Clinton has held barely one a month. instead modern pres idents make fo rmal speeches. A president's use of these speeches is
often called the bully pulpit. a phrase that means
taking advantage of the prestige and visi bility of the
presidency to try to guide or mobilize the American
people.

Popularity and Influence
The object of a ll this talk is to convert personal popularity into congressional support for the president's
leg islative programs (an d improved chances for
reelection). It is not obvious. of course. why Congress
should care about a president's popularity. After all.
as we saw in Chapter 13. most members of Co ngress
are secure in their seats. and few need fear any
"party bosses" who might deny them renomination.
Moreover. the president cannot ordinarily provide
credible electoral rewards or penalties to members of
Congress. By work ing for their defeat in the 1938
congressional election. President Roosevelt attempted to "purge" members of Congress who opposed his
program. but he fail ed. Nor does presidential support
help a particu lar member of Congress: most representatives wi n reelection anyway. and the few who

The Power to Persuade

Table 14.3

.Gains or Losses of
President's Party In:

Year

President

Party

House

1932
1936
1940
1944
1948
1952
1956
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004

Roosevelt
Roosevelt
Roosevelt
Rooseve lt
Truman
Eisenhower
Eisenhower
Ken nedy
Johnson
Nixon
Nixon
Carter
Reagan
Reagan
Bush
Cli nton
Clinton
Bush
Bush

Oem .
Oem .
Oem .
Oem .
Oem.
Rep.
Rep.
Oem .
Oem.
Rep.
Re p.
Oem.
Rep .
Rep.
Rep.
Oem .
Oem .
Rep .
Rep .

+90
+12
+7
+24
+75
+22
-3
- 20
+37
+5
+12
+1
+33
+1 6
-3
-9
+9
-3
+4

Senate
+9
+7
-3
-2
+9
+1
-1
+1
+1
+7
-2
+1
+ 12
-2
-1
+1
-2
-4
+4

Sources: Updated from Congressional Quarterly, Guide to u.s
Elections, 928; and Congress and the Nation, vol. 4 (1973-1976),
28 .

are in trouble a re rarely saved by presidential intervention. When President Reagan campaigned hard
for Republican senatorial cand idates in 1986. he.
too, failed to have much impact.
For a while scholars thought that congressional
candidates might benefit from the president's coattails: they might ride into office on the strength of
the popularity of a president of their own party, It is
true. as can be seen from Table 14.3. that a winning
president will find that his party's strength in Congress increases.
But there are good reasons to doubt whether the
pattern observed in Table 14.3 is the result of presidential coattails. For one thing. there are some exceptions. Eisenhower won 57.4 percent of the vote in
1956. but the Republicans lost seats in the House
and Senate. Kennedy won in 1960. but the Democrats lost seats in the House and ga ined but one in
the Senate. When Nixon was reelected in 1972 with
one of the largest majorities in history. the Republicans lost seats in the Senate.

Careful studies of voter attitudes and of how presidential and congressional candidates fare in the same
districts suggest that. whatever may once have been
the influence of coattails. their effect has declined in
recent years and is quite small today. The weakening
of party loyalty and of party organizations. combined
with the enhanced ability of members of Congress to
build secure relations with their constituents. has
tended to insul ate congressional elections from presidential ones. When voters choose as members of
Congress people of the same party as an incoming
president, they probably do so out of desire for a general change and as an adverse judgment about the
outgoing party's performance as a whole. not because
they want to supply the new president with members
of Congress favorable to him.1 4 The big increase in
Republican senators and representatives that accompanied the election of Ronald Reagan in 1980 was
probably as much a result of the unpopularity of the
outgoing president and the circumstances of various
local races as it was of Reagan's coattails.
onetheless. a president's personal popularity
may have a significant effect on how much of his
program Congress passes. even if it does not affect
the reelection chances of those members of Congress. Though they do not fear a president who
threatens to campaign aga inst them (or cherish one
who promises to support them). members of Congress do have a sense that it is risky to oppose too
adamantly the policies of a popular president. Politicians share a sense of a common fate: they tend to
rise or fall together. Statistically a president's popularity. as measured by the Gallup poll (see Figure
14.2). is associated with the proportion of his legislative proposals that are approved by Congress (see
Figure 14.3). Other things being equal. the more
popular the president. the higher the proportion of
his bills that Congress will pass.
But use these figures with caution. How successful
a president is with Congress depends not just on the
numbers reported here. but on a lot of other factors as
well. First, he can be "successful" on a big bill or on a
trivial one. If he is successfu l on a lot of small matters
and never on a big one, the measure of presidential
victories does not tell us much. Second. a president
can keep his victory score high by not taking a position on any controversial measure. (President Carter
made his views known on on ly 22 percent of the
House votes. while President Eisenhower made his
views known on 56 percent of those votes.) Third. a

391

392

Chapter 14

Figure 14.2

The Presidency

Presidential Popularity

TRUMAN
First Term
Second Term

EISENH OWER
First Term
Second Term

KENNEDY

JOHNSON

NIXON
NIXON
First Term Second Term

90
80
70
tlD

c
.> 60
0

Ci
0-

ro

50

Q)

OJ)

.:g
c

40

Q)

~

Q)

CL

30
20
10

1945

1947

1949

1951

1953

1955

1957

1959

1961

1963

1965

1967

1969

1971

1973

Note: Popu larity was measured by asking every few months, "Do you approve of the way

is handling his job as presidenP"
Source.· Thomas E. Cronin, The State of the Presidency (Boston: Littl e, Brow n, 1975), 110- 111 . Copyrig ht
© 1975 by Little, Brown and Company, Inc. Reprinted by permission. Updated with Gallup poll data,
1976-2004. Reprinted by permission of the Gallup Poll News Service.

president can appear successful if a few bills he likes
are passed, but most of his legis la tive program is bottled up in Congress and never comes to a vote. Give n
these probl ems, "presidential victories" are hard to
measure accurately.
A fourth general ca ution: presidential popul a rity
is hard to predict an d can be greatly inl1uenced by
factors over which n obody, including the president,
has mu ch control. For example, when he took office
in 2001 , President George W. Bush's approval rating
was 57 percent, nearly identical to what President
Bill Cli nton received in his initial rating (58 percent)
in 199 3. But Bush a lso had the hi ghest initial disa pprova l rating (25 percent) of a ny president sin ce
polling began. This was undoubtedly partly due to
his beco ming pres ident on the heels of the Florida
vote-cou nt controversy (see Ch apter 10). Bush 's
approva l ratings through his first six months were
fair ly typica l for post-1960 presidents. But from th e
terrorist attack on the United States on September
11. 2001 throug h mid-2002, his approva l ratin gs
never dipped below 70 percent. a nd the a pproval rat-

in gs he received shortly after the attack (hovering
around 90 percent) were the highest ever recorded.

The Decline in Popularity
Though presidential popularity is an asset, its value
tends inexorably to decline. As can be seen (rom Figure 14 .2. every president except Eisen hower, Reagan, and Clinton lost popular support between his
inauguration and the time that he left office, except
when hi s reelection gave him a brief burst of
renewed popularity. Truman was hurt by improprieties among his subordinates and by the protracted
Korean War: Johnson was crippled by the increasing
unpopul arity of the Vietnam War; Nixon was severely da maged by the Watergate scanda l; Ford was hurt
by havin g pa rdoned ixon for his part in Watergate;
Carter was weaken ed by co ntinuing inflation, staff
irregu lariti es, and the Iranian kidnapping of America n hostages; George H.W. Bush was harm ed by an
economic recession . Remarkably. Cli nton's approva l
rating was not greatly har med by hi s a ffa ir with
Monica Lew insky a nd his impeachment.

393

The Power to Persuade

FORD

CARTER
First Term

1975

1977

1979

Figure 14.3

1981

REAGAN
Second Term

1983

1985

1987

BUSH

1989

1991

CLINTON
First Term
Second Term

1993

1995

1997

1999

G.W. BUSH
First Term

2001

2003

2005

Presidential Victories on Votes in Congress, 1953-2002
Ken nedy

Ei sen hower

Johnson

Nixon

Ford

Carter

Reagan

Bush

G.W. Bush

Clinton

<l)

OJ)

co

C
<l)
u

Qj

a..

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

Note: Percentages in dicate number of congressional votes supporting the president divided by t he total
number of vot es on w hich the president has taken a position.
Source: From Harold Stanley and Richard Niemi, Vital Statistics on American Politics, 2003-2004
(Washi ngton, D.C Congressional Quarterly Press, 2003), Table 6-7.

1990

1995

2000

2005

394

Chapter 14

The Presidel1 cy

•

.-

Gains or Losses of
President's Party In:
Year

President

Party

Ho use

Senate

1934
1938
1942
1946
1950
1954
1958
1962
1966
1970
1974
1978
1982
1986
1990
1994
1998
2002

Roosevelt
Roosevelt
Roosevelt
Tr uman
Truman
Ei senhower
Eisenhower
Kennedy
Johnson
Ni xo n
Fo rd
Carter
Reagan
Reagan
Bush
Clinton
Clinto n
G.W. Bush

Dem .
Dem .
Dem .
Dem .
Dem .
Rep .
Rep.
Dem .
Dem .
Rep.
Rep.
Dem .
Rep .
Rep.
Rep.
Dem.
Dem .
Rep .

+9
- 70
- 50
- 54
- 29
- 18
- 47
-5
- 48
- 12
- 48
- 12
- 26
-5
-9
- 52
+5
+8

+9
-7
-8
- 11
-5
-1
- 13
+2
-4

+1
-5
-3
0
-8
-1
-9
0
+2

Source: Harold W. Stanley and Richard G. Niemi, Vital Statistics
on American Politics, 2002-2003 (Washington, D.c.. Congressional Quarterly, 2003), table 1- 10.

have been political su icide for Congress to have
blocked. or even delayed , action on measures that
appeared designed to help the nation out of the crisis.
Other presidents, serv ing in more norma l times,
have not enjoyed su ch a honeymoon. Truman had
little success with wh at he proposed; Eisen hower proposed littl e. Kennedy, Nixon, Ford, and Carter had
some victories in their first year in office, bu t nothi ng
that could be called a honeymoon. Only Lyn don
Jo hnson enjoyed a highly productive relationshi p
with Congress; until the Vietna m Wa r sapped his
strength , he rarely lost. Reagan began h is administration with important victories in his effort to cut
expenditures and taxes, but in his second year in
offi ce he ran in to tro uble.
The decay in the reputation of the president and
his party in midterm is evident in Ta ble 14.4. Since
1934, in every off-year election but two, the president's party h as lost seats in one or both houses of
Congress. In 1998 the Democrats won five seats in
the House an d lost none in the Senate: in 2002 the
Repub licans gained eight House seats and two in the
Senate. The ability of the president to persuade is
importa nt but limited. However, he a lso h as a powerful barga ining chip to play: the ab ility to say no.

The Power to Say No
Because a president's popularity tends to be highest
right after an election, politica l commentators like to
speak of a "honeymoon," during which, presumably,
the president's love affair with the people and with
Congress can be consummated. Certainly Roosevelt
enjoyed such a honeymoon. In the legendary "fLrst
hundred days" of h is presidency, from March to June
1933, FDR obtained from a willing Congress a vast
array of new laws creating new agencies and authorizing new powers, But those were extraordinary times:
the most serious economic depression of this century
had put millions out of work, closed banks, impoverished farmers, and ru ined the stock market. It would

veto message

A message from the president
to Congress stating that he will not sign a bill
it has passed. Must be produced within ten
days of the bill's passage .

pocket veto

A bil l fails to become law because
the president did not sign it within ten days
before Congress adjourns.

The Constitution gives the president the power to
veto legislation. In addition, most preSidents have
asserted the right of "executive privi lege, " or the
right to withh old information that Congress may
want to obta in from the president or his subordinates, and some presidents have tri ed to impou nd
fu nds appropriated by Congress. These effor ts by the
presi dent to say no are not only a way of blocking
action but a lso a way of forCi ng Congress to bargain
with him over the substance of po licies.

li'to
H a president disapproves of a bill passed by both
ho uses of Congress, he may veto it in one of two
ways. One is by a veto m essage . This is a statement
that the presiden t sends to Congress accompany ing
the bill , within ten days (not co unting Sundays) after
the bill has been passed. In it he sets for th his reasons
for not sign ing the bill. The other is the pocket veto,
If the president does not sign the bill withi n ten days
and Cong ress has adjourned with in that time, then
the bill wi ll not become law. Obv ious ly a pocket veto

Th e Power to Say No

Table 14.5

..

.

Regular
Vetoes
Washington
Madison
Monroe
Jackson
Tyler
Polk
Pierce
Buchanan
Lincoln
A. Johnson
Grant
Hayes
Arthur
Cleveland
Harrison
Cleveland
McKinley
T. Roosevelt
Taft
Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
Bush
Clinton
G.w. Bush

..

.

2
5
1
5
6
2
9
4
2
21
45
12
4
304
19
43
6
42
30
33
5
20
21
372
180
73
12
16
26
48
13
39
29
36
0

Pocket
Vetoes
2
7
3
3
4
8
49
1
8
109
25
127
36
40
9
11
1
30
16
263
70
108
9
14
17
18
18
39
15
1
0

Total
Vetoes
2
7
1
12
9
3
9
7
6
29
94
13
12
413
44
170
42
82
39
44
6
50
37
635
250
181
21
30
43
66
31
78
44
37
0

It'

Vetoes
Overridden

5

15
4

2
1
5

1
6
4
3
9
12
2

7
12
2
9
1
2
0

Source: Harold W. Stanley and Richard G. Niemi, Vital Statistics
on American Politics, 2003-2004 (Washington, D.C.: Congres-

sional Quarterly, 2003), table 6·9.

ca n be used only during a certain tim e of the yearjust before Congress adj ourns at the end of its second
session . At ti mes, however, presid en ts have pocketvetoed a bill just before Con gress recessed for a summer vacation or to permit its m embers to ca mpa ign
during a n off- year election . In 1972 Sen a tor Edward
M. Kennedy of Massa chu setts protested th at this was
unconstitutional. since a recess is not the sa me thing
as an adj ournment. In a case brought to federa l
court, Kennedy was upheld , a nd it is n ow u nderstood
th at the pocket veto can be used only just befo re th e
life of a given Congress expires.

A bill th a t is not sign ed or vetoed wi thin ten days
whil e Con gress is still in session becomes law a u tomatically, with ou t the presiden t's a pproval. A bill
th at h as been returned to Con gress w ith a veto message can be passed over the pres ident's obj ections if
at least two-thirds of each house votes to overrid e the
veto. A bill that has received a pocket veto cannot be
bro ught back to life by Congress (since Congress h as
adj ourned) . nor does such a bill carryover to th e
next session of Congress. If Co ngress wants to press
the matter, it will h ave to star t all over aga in by passing th e bill a n ew in its next session , and then h ope
that the pres iden t w ill sign it or, if he does not, th a t
they can over ride his veto.
The presiden t must either accept or reject the entire bill . P residents did not have the power, possessed
by most governors, to exercise a line-item veto, with
which the chief executive ca n approve some provisions of a bill and disapprove others. Congress could
take adva ntage of this by putting items th e presiden t
did not like into a bill he otherwise favored, forcing him
to a pprove those provisions alon g with the rest of the
bill or reject the whole thing. In 1996 Congress passed
a bill , which the presiden t signed into law, th at gives
the presiden t the power of "enhan ced rescission. " This
means the president could ca ncel parts of a spending
bill passed by Congress without vetoing the entire bill.
The presiden t h ad five days after signing a bill to send
a message to Congress rescinding some parts of what
he had sign ed. Th ese rescissions would ta ke effect
unless Congress. by a two-thirds vote, overturned
them. Congress could choose which parts of th e presiden t's can cella tions it wa nted to overturn. But the
Supreme Court has decided th at this law is unconstitutional. The Constitu tion gives the president no such
power to carve up a bill : he must either sign the whole
bill , veto the whole bill. or a llow it to become law without his signa ture. 1 5
Never theless. the veto power is a substantia l one,
because Co ngress rarely has the votes to override it.
From George Washington to Bill Clinton , over 2 ,500
presidenti a l vetoes were cast; a bout 4 percen t were
overridd e n (see Table 14 .5) . Clevela nd , Fra nklin
Roosevelt, Truma n , and Eisenhower m ade the most
extensive use of vetoes, accounting for 65 percen t of

line-item veto An executive's ability to block
a particular provision in a bill passed by the
legislature.

395

396

Chapter 14

The Presidency

all vetoes ever cast. George W. Bush did not veto a
single bill in his first term. Often the vetoed legislation is revised by Congress and passed in a form suitable to the president. There is no tally of how often
this happens. but it is frequent enough so that both
branches of government recognize that the veto. or
even the threat of it. is part of an elaborate process of
political negotiation in which the president has substantial powers.

Executive Privilege
The Constitution says nothing about whether the
president is obliged to divulge private communications between himself and his principal advisers. but
presidents have acted as if they do have that privilege
of confidentiality. The presidential claim is based on
two grounds. First. the doctrine of the separation of
powers means that one branch of government does
not have the right to inquire into the internal workings of another branch headed by constitutionally
named officers. Second . the principles of statecraft
and of prudent administration require that the president have the right to obtain confidential and candid
advice from subordinates; such advice could not be
obtained if it would quickly be exposed to public
scrutiny.
For almost two hundred years there was no serious chall enge to the claim of presidential confidentiality. The Supreme Court did not require the
disclosure of confidential communications to or from
the president. 16 Congress was never happy with this
claim but until 1973 did not seriously dispute it.
Indeed. in 1962 a Senate committee explicitly
accepted a claim by President Kennedy that his secretary of defense. Robert S. McNamara. was not
obliged to divulge the identity of Defense Department
officials who had censored certain speeches by generals and admirals.
In 1973 the Supreme Court for the first time met
the issue directly. A federal special prosecutor sought
tape recordings of White House conversations
between President Nixon and his advisers as part of
his investigation of the Watergate scandal. In the
case of United States v. Nixon. the Supreme Court. by
a vote of eight to zero. held that while there may be a
sound basis for the claim of executive privilege. especia lly where sensitive military or diplomatic matters
are involved, there is no "absolute unqualified Presidential privilege of immunity from judicial process
under a ll circumstances. "l 7 To admit otherw ise

would be to block the constitutionally defined function of the federal courts to decide criminal cases.
Thus ixon was ordered to hand over the disputed tapes and papers to a federal judge so that the
judge could decide which were relevant to the case at
hand and allow those to be introduced into evidence.
In the future another president may well persuade
the Court that a different set of records or papers is so
sensitive as to require protection. especially if there is
no allegation of criminal misconduct requiring the
production of evidence in court. As a practical matter it seems likely that presidential advisers will be
able. except in unusual cases such as Watergate. to
continue to give private advice to the president.
In 1997 and 1998 President Clinton was sued
while in office by a private person. Paula Jones. who
claimed that he had solicited sex from her in ways
that hurt her reputation. In defending himself
against that and other matters. his lawyers attempted
to claim executive privilege for Secret Service officers
and government-paid lawyers who worked with him.
but federal courts held that not only cou ld a president
be sued. but these other offlcials could not claim executive privilege. I S One unhappy consequence of this
episode is that the courts have greatly weakened the
number of offlcials with whom the president can
speak in confidence. It is not easy to run an organization when the courts can later compel your associates
to testify about everything you said.

Impoundment of Funds
From time to time presidents have refused to spend
money appropriated by Congress. Truman did not
spend all that Congress wanted spent on the armed
forces. and Johnson did not spend all that Congress
made ava ilable for highway construction. Kennedy
refused to spend money appropriated for new
weapons systems that he did not like. Indeed. the
precedent for impounding funds goes back at least to
the administration of Thomas Jefferson.
But what has precedent is not thereby constitutional. The Constitution is silent on whether the
president mLlst spend the money that Congress appropriates; all it says is that the president cannot spend
money that Congress has not appropriated. The major
test of presidential power in this respect occurred during the Nixon administration. Nixon wished to reduce
federal spending. He proposed in 1972 that Congress
give him the power to reduce federal spending so that
it would not exceed $250 billion for the coming year.

The Presidel1t's Program
Congress, under Democratic control. refused. Nixon
responded by pocket-vetoing twelve spending bills
and then impounding fund s appropriated under
other laws that he had not vetoed.
Congress in turn responded by passing the Budget
Reform Act o[ 1974, which, among other things ,
requires the president to spend a ll appropriated funds
unless he first tells Congress what funds he wishes
not to spend and Congress, within forty-five days,
agrees to delete the items. If he wishes simply to
delay spending the mon ey. he need only inform Congress, but Congress then can refuse the delay by passing a resolution requiring the immediate release of
the money. Federal courts have upheld the rule that
the president must spend. without delay for policy
reasons, money that Congress has appropriated.

The President's Progranl
Imagine that you have just spent three or four years
running for president, during which time you have
given essentia lly the same speech over and over
again. You have had no time to study the issues in
any depth. To reach a large television audience. you
have couched your ideas largely in rather simple- if
not simple-minded-s logans. Your principal adv isers
are political a ides, not legislative specialists.
You win. You are inaugurated. Now you mu st be a
president instead of just talking about it. You must fill
hundreds of appointive posts, but you know persona lly only a handful of the cand id ates. You must deliver a State of the Union message to Congress only two
or three weeks after you are sworn in. It is quite possible that you have never read, much less written,
such a message before. You must submit a new budget; the old one is hundreds of pages long, much of
it comprehensible only to experts. Foreign governments, as well as the stock market, hang on your
every word, interpreting many of yo ur remarks in
ways that tota lly surprise you. What will you do ?
The Constitution is not much help. It directs you
to report on the state of the union and to recommend
"such measures" as you sha ll judge "necessary and
exped ient." Beyond that you are charged to "ta ke
care that the laws be faithfully exec uted. "
At one time, of course, the demands placed on a
newly elected president were not very great, because
the pres ident was not expected to do very much. The
president, on assuming office, might speak of the tar-

iff. or relations with England, or the va lue of veterans' pensions, or the need for civil service reform , but
he was not expected to have so mething to say (and
offer) to everybody. Today he is.

Putting Together a Program
To develop policies on short notice, a president wi ll
draw on several sources, each with particular
strengths and weaknesses:
• Interest groups
Streng til: Will have specific plans and ideas.
Weakness: Will have narrow view of the public
interest.
• Aides and campaign advisers
Strengtil: Will test new ideas for their political
soundness.
Weakness: Will not have many ideas to test, being
inexperienced in government.
• Federal bureaus and agencies
Strength: Will know what is feasible in terms of
govern mental realities.
Weakness: Wi ll propose plans that promote own
agencies and will not have good information on
whether plans will work.
• Outside, academic, and other specialists and
experts
Strength: Will have many general ideas and criticisms of existing programs.
Weakness: Will not know the details of policy or
have good judgment as to what is feasib le.

There are essentially two ways for a pres ident to
deve lop a program. One, exemplifi ed by Pres idents
Carter and Clinton, is to have a policy on almost
everything. To do this they worked end less hours and
stud ied countless documents, trying to learn something about, and then state their positions on, a large
number of issues. The other method . illustrated by
President Reagan, is to concentrate on three or four
major initiatives or themes and leave everything else
to subordinates.
But even when a president has a governing philosophy, as did Reagan. he cannot risk plunging ahead on
his own. He must judge public and congressional reaction to this program before he commits himself fully to
it. Therefore, he will often allow parts of his program
to be "leaked" to the press, or to be "floated" as a tria l
balloon. Reagan's conm1itment to a 30 percent tax cut

397

398

Chapter 14

The Presidency

and larger military expenditures was so well known
that it required no leaking. but he did have to Iloat his
ideas on Social Security and certain budget cuts to test
popular reaction. His opponents in the bureaucracy
did exactly the same thing. hoping for the opposite
effect. They leaked controversial parts of the program
in an effort to discredit the whole policy. This process of
testing the winds by a president and his critics helps
explain why so many news stories coming from Washington mention no person by name but only an
anonymous "highly placed source."
In addition to the risks of adverse reaction, the
president faces three other constraints on his ability
to plan a program. One is the sheer limit of his time
and attention span. Every president works harder
than he has ever worked before. A ninety-hour week
is typical. Even so. he has great difl1culty keeping up
with all the things that he is supposed to know and
make decisions about. For example. Congress during
an average year passes between four hundred and six
hundred bills. each of which the president must sign,
veto, or allow to take effect without his signature.
Scores of people wish to see him. Hundreds of phone
calls must be made to members of Congress and others in order to ask for help. to smooth rumed feathers, or to get information. He must receive all newly
appOinted ambassadors and visiting heads of state
and in addition have his picture taken with countless
people. from a Nobel Prize winner to a child whose
likeness will appear on the Easter Seal.
The second constraint is the unexpected crisis.
Franklin Roosevelt obviously had to respond to a
depression and to the mounting risks of world war.
But most preSidents get their crises when they least
expect them. Consider these crises:
Kennedy

•
•
•
•

Failure of Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba
Soviets put missiles in Cuba
China invades India
Federal troops sent to the South to protect blacks
Johnson

•
•
•
•
•
•

Vietnam War
Black riots in major cities
War between India and Pakistan
Civ il war in Dominican Republic
Arab-Israeli war
Civil rights workers murdered in South

Nixon

•
•
•
•

Watergate scandal
Arab-Israeli war
Value of dollar falls in foreign trade
Arabs raise the price of oil
Carter

•
•
•
•

OMB director Bert Lance accused of improprieties
Lengthy coa l strike
Seizure of American hostages in Iran
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
Reagan

•
•
•
•
•

Poland suppresses Solidarity movement
U.S. troops sent to Lebanon
U.S. hostages held in Lebanon
Civil war in Nicaragua
Iran-contra crisis
Bush (the elder)

• Soviet Union dissolves
• Iraq invades Kuwait
Clinton

• Civi l war continues in Bosnia and other parts of
the former Yugoslavia
• Investigation of possible wrongdoing of President
and Mrs. Clinton in Whitewater real estate
developmen t
• Clinton impeached
Bush (the younger)

• Terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and Pentagon kill close to 3,000 people
• U.S.-led war against terrorists in Afghanistan and
Iraq
The third constraint is the fact that the federal
government and most federal programs. as well as
the federal budget, can only be changed marginally.
except in special circumstances. The vast bulk of federa l expenditures are beyond control in any given
year: the money must be spent whether the president
likes it or not. Many federal programs have such
strong congressional or public support that they
must be left intact or modified only slightly. And this
means that most federal employees can count on
being secure in their jobs. whatever a president's
views on reducing the bureaucracy.

Th e President's Program
The result of these constraints is that the president. at least in ordinary ti mes. has to be selective
about what he wants. He ca n be thought of as having a stock of influence a nd prestige the way that he
might have a supply of money. If he wants to get the
most "return" on his resources, he mu st "invest" that
influence a nd prestige carefully in enterprises that
promise substantial gains- in public benefits and
political support-at reasonable costs. Each president tends to spea k in terms of cha ngin g everyth in g
at once. ca lling his approach a "New DeaL" a "New
Frontier. " a "Great Society," or the "New Federa lism. " But beneath the rhetoric he mu st identify a few
specific proposals on which he wishes to bet his
resources, mindful of the need to leave a substa ntial
stock of resources in reserve to handle the inevitable
crises a nd emergencies. In recent decades events
have required every president to devote mu ch of his
time a nd resources to two key issues: the state of the
economy a nd foreign affa irs. What he man ages to do
beyo nd this will depend on his person al views and his
sense of what the nation. as well as his reelection.
requires.
And it will depend on one other thin g: opinion
polls. The last president who never used polls was
Herbert Hoover. Fran klin Roosevelt bega n making
heavy use of them, and every president since h as
relied on them. Bill Clinton had voters polled about
almost everything-where he should go on vacation
(the West) and how to deal with Bosnia (no ground
troops).
Once. when polls did not ex ist, politicians often
believed that they should do what they thought the
public interest required. Now that polls are com monplace. some politicians act on the basis of what their
constitu ents want. Scholars ca ll the first view the
trustee approach: do what the public good requires,
even if the voters are skeptical. The second view is
the delegate model: do what your constituents want
you to do.
But there is another way of looking at polls. They
may be a device not for picking a policy, but for deciding what lan guage to use in explainin g that policy.
Choose a policy that helps you get reelected or that
satisfies a n interest group, bu t then expl ain it with
poll-tested words. President Clinton wanted to keep
affirmative action (described in the chapter titled
"Civil Rights") but knew that most voters disliked it.
So he used a poll-tested phrase- "mend it but don't
end it"- and then did nothin g to mend it.

Finally, a president's progra m can be radically
a ltered by a dramatic even t or prolonged crisis.
George W. Bush ran as a ca ndid ate in terested in
domestic issues and with little background in foreign
affa irs. bu t the terrorist attack of September 11.
2001. on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon
dramatically changed his presidency into one preoccupied with foreign and milita ry policy. He quickly
launched a mili tary attack on the Ta liban regime in
Afghanista n and assembled an in ternational coa lition to support it. His approval ratings rose to th e
highest level yet recorded. but a year later fell sha rply.

Attempts to Reorganize
One item on the presidential agenda has been the
sa me for a lm ost every pres id ent since Herbert
Hoover: reorganizing the executive branch of government. In the wake of the terrorist attack on the
United States on September 11. 2001 , the president.
by executive order. created a new White House Office
of Homeland Security, headed by his friend and former Pennsylvania governor, Tom Rid ge. In the
months that followed, it became clear to all , includin g the president, that he had given Ridge an impossible job. For one thing , despite its obviou s
importance. Ridge's office. like most units with the
Executive Office of the President. h ad only a dozen or
so full-time staff, little budgeta ry authori ty, and virtu ally no ability to m a ke a nd enforce decisions
regarding how cabinet agencies operated. Nobody
could meaningfully coord inate the litera lly dozens of
administrative units that the administration's new
homeland security blueprint required Ridge's office
to somehow manage.
To address this problem. President Bush called for
a reorga nization that would create the third-largest
cabinet depa rtm ent encompassing twenty-two federa l agencies, nearly 180,000 employees. and an
a nnual budget of close to $40 billion. Among the
federal agencies placed under the new Department of
Homeland Security are the Coast Guard. the Customs Service. the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. and the Immigration and Naturalization
Service. A law a uthorizin g the new Department of
Homela nd Security was enacted in November 2002.
but it will take years and much effort for the new
agency to become fully operational.
Important as it is, the ongoing attempt to reorga nize the federal government around homelan d
security goa ls is neither the fir st. nor even the largest.

399

4 00

Chapter 14

The Presidency

Polling dominates not ollly politics but also government, since
sOllie presidents rely all polls to decide fl ow to discuss issues.

reo rganization effort made by a sitting president.
With few exceptions every president since 1928 has
tried to change the structure of the sta fr. departments, and agencies that are theoretica lly subordinate to him. Every pres ident has been appa lled by the
number of agencies that report to him a nd by the
apparently helter-skelter mann er in wh ich they have
grown up. But this is only one- and often not the
most important- reason for wanting to reorganize.
If' a president wants to get somethin g done. put new
people in cha rge of a program, or recapture po liti ca l
support for a policy, it is often easier to do so by creatin g a new agency or reorganizing an old one than
by abolishing a progra m, firing a subordinate, or
passing a new law. Reorganization serves many
obj ectives an d thus is a recurring theme.
Legally the president can reorganize his person al
White House staff a nytime that he wishes. To reorganize in any important way the larger Executive
Offtce of the President or any of the executive departments or agencies. however, Cong ress must first be
consulted. For over forty years this consultation usually took the form of submittin g to Congress a reorganization plan th at would take effect provided that

The autho rit y of Co ngress t o
block a presidential action after it ha s taken
place . The Supreme Court has held that Congress does not have this powe r.

le gislative veto

neither the House nor the Senate passed, within sixty
days, a concurrent resolution disa pprovin g the pla n
(such a resolution was ca lled a le gi sla tive veto). This
procedure, frrst authorized by the Reorganization Act
of 1939, could be used to cha nge, but not create
or abolish, an executive agency. In 1981 authority
under that act expired, and Congress did not renew it.
Two years later the Supreme Court declared that all
legisla tive vetoes were unconstitutiona l (see Chapter
15), and so today any presidential reorganization
plan would have to take the form of a regular law,
passed by Congress a nd signed by the president.
What has been said so far may well give the reader the impress ion that the presi dent is virtually helpless. That is not the case. The actual power of the
pres ident ca n only be measured in terms of what he
can accomplish. What this cha pter has described so
far is the offi ce as the president finds it- the burd ens.
restra ints. demands , com plex iti es, and resources
that h e enco unters on entering the Ova l Offi ce for the
frr st time. Every president since Truman has commented feelingly on how limited the powers of the
president seem from the inside compa red to what
they appear to be from the outsid e. Fra nk lin Roosevelt compared his struggles with the bureaucracy
to punchin g a feather bed; Truman wrote that the
power of the president was chiefly the power to persua de people to do what they ought to do anyway.
After being in office a year or so. Kennedy spoke to
interviewers about how much more co mp lex the
world a ppeared than he had first supposed. Johnson
and Nixon were broken by the office and the events
that ha ppened there.
Yet Fra nklin Roosevelt helped create the modern
presidency. with its vast organizational reach , and
directed a mass ive war effort. Truman ordered two
atom ic bombs dropped on Japanese cities. Eisenh ower sent American troops to Lebanon; Kennedy supported an effort to invade Cuba . Johnson sent troops
to the Dominican Repub lic and to Vietna m; Nixon
ordered an invasion of Cambod ia; Reaga n la un ched
an invasion of Grenada and sponsored a n a ntigovern ment insurgent group in Nicaragua; Bush invaded Panama and sent troops to the Persian Gulf to
fight Iraq; Clinton sent troops to Haiti and Bosnia.
Geo rge W. Bush ordered a u.s. military operation in
Afgha nistan and Iraq. Obvious ly Europea ns, Ru ssians, Vietnamese, Cambodians, Dominicans. Panaman ians, and Iraqis do not think of the America n
pres ident as "helpless."

Presidential Transition

~ Presidential Transition
No president but Franklin Roosevelt has ever served
more than two terms , and since the ratification of
the Twenty-second Amendment in 1951, no president will ever again have the chance. But more than
tradition or the Constitution escorts presidents from
office. Only about one-third of the presidents since
George Washington have been elected to a second
term. Of the twenty-seven not reelected, four died in
office during their first term. But the remainder
either did not seek or (more usually) could not obtain
reelection.
Of the eight presidents who died in office, four
were assassinated: Lincoln, Garfi eld, McK inley, and
Kennedy. At least six other presidents were the
objects of unsuccessful assassination attempts:
Jackson, Theodore Roosevelt, Frankli n Roosevelt,
Truman, Ford, and Reagan. (There may have been
attempts on other presidents that never came to public notice; the attempts mentioned here involved public efforts to fire weapons at presidents.)
The presidents who served two or more terms fall
into certain periods, such as the Founding (Washington, Jefferson, Madison, Monroe) or wartime (Lincoln , Wilson, Roosevelt), or they happened to be in
office during especia lly tranqu il times (Monroe,
McKinley, Eisenhower, Clinton), or some combination of the above. When the country was deeply
divided, as during the years just before the Civil War
and during the period of Reconstruction after it, it
was the rare president who was reelected.

The Vice President
Eight times a vice president has become president
because of the death of his predecessor. It first happened to John Tyler, who became president in 1841
when William Henry Harrison died peacefully after
only one month in office. The question for Tyler and
for the country was substantial: was Tyler simply to
be the acting president and a kind of caretaker until
a new president was elected, or was he to be president
in every sense of the word ? Despite criticism and
despite what might have been the contrary intention
of the Framers of the Constitution, Tyler decided on
the latter course and was confirmed in that opinion
by a decision of Congress. Ever since, the vice president has automatically become president, in title and
in powers, when the occupant of the White House
has died or resigned.

But if vice presidents frequently acquire office
because of death, they rarely acquire it by election.
Since the earliest period of the Founding, when John
Adams and Thomas Jefferson were each elected president after having first served as vice president under
their predecessors, there have only been three occasions when a vice president was later ab le to win the
presidency without his president's having died in
office. One was in 1836, when Martin Van Buren
was elected president after having served as Andrew
Jackson's vice president; the second was in 1968 ,
when Richard Nixon became president after having
served as Dwight Eisenhower's vice president eight
years earlier; the third was in 1988, when George
Bush succeeded Ronald Reagan. Many vice presidents who entered the Oval Office because their predecessors died were subsequently elected to terms
in their own right-Theodore Roosevelt, Calvin
Coolidge, Harry Truman, and Lyndon Johnson. But
no one who wishes to become president should
assume that to become vice president first is the best
way to get there.
The vice-presidency is just what so many vice presidents have complained about its being: a rather empty
job. John Adams described it as "the most insigniftcant
office that ever the invention of man contrived or his
imagination conceived," and most of his successors
would have agreed. Thomas Jefferson. almost alone,
had a good word to say for it: "The second office of the
government is honorable and easy, the fIrst is but a
splendid misery."19 Daniel Webster rejected a vicepresidentia l nomination in 1848 with the phrase, "I
do not choose to be buried until I am reaUy dead."2o
(Had he taken the job, he would have become president after Zachary Taylor died in office, thereby
achieving a remarkable secular resurrection.) For all
the good and bad jokes about the vice-presidency.
however. candidates still struggle mightily for it. John
Nance Garner gave up the speakership of the House to
become Franklin Roosevelt's vice president (a job he
valued as "not worth a pitcher of warm spit"*), and
Lyndon Johnson gave up the majority leadership of
the Senate to become Kennedy's. Truman, Nixon.
Humphrey, Monda le, and Gore all left reasonably
secure Senate seats for the vice-presidency.
The only official task of the vice president is to
preside over the Senate and to vote in case of a tie.

*The word he actually used was a good deal stronger than

spit, but historians are decorous.

401

402

Chapter 14

The Presidency

President Reagan, moments iJefore he was shot on March 30,
1981, iJy (f wOLlld-iJe assassin. The Twenty-fifth Amendlllent
solves the proiJlem of presidential disaiJility iJy providing for an
orderly transfer of power to the vice president.

Even this is scarcely time-consuming, as the Senate
chooses from among its members a president pro
tempore, as required by the Constitution, who (along
with others) presides in the absence of the vice president. The vice president's leadership powers in the
Senate are weak, especially when the vice president
is of a different party from the majority of the senators . But on occasion the vice pres ident can become
very important. Right after the terrorists attacked
the United States in 2001. President Bush was in his
airplane while his advisers worried that he might be
attacked next. Vice President Cheney was quickly
hidden away in a secret. sec ure location so he could
run the government if anyth ing happened to President Bush. And for many months thereafter, Cheney
stayed in this location in case he suddenly became
president. But absent a cris is, the vice president is, at
best, only an adviser to the president.

Problems of Succession
If the president should die in ofllce, the right of the
vice president to assume that office has been clear
since the time of John Ty ler. But two questions
remain: What if the president falls seriously ill, but
does not die? And if th e vice pres ident steps up, who
then becomes the new vice president?
The first problem has arisen on a number of occasions. After President James A. Garfield was shot in

1881. he lingered through the summer before he
died. President Woodrow Wilson collapsed from a
stroke and was a virtual recluse for seven months in
1919 and an invalid for the rest of his term. Eisenhower had three serious illnesses while in office; Reagan was shot during his first term and hospitali zed
during his second.
The second problem has arisen on eight occasions
when the vice president became president owing to
the death of the incumbent. In these cases no elected
person was avai lable to succeed the new president,
should he die in ofllce. For many decades the problem
was handled by law. The Succession Act of 1886, for
example, designated the secretary of state as next in
line for the presidency should the vice president die,
followed by the other cabinet officers in order of seniority. But this meant that a vice president who
became president could pick his own successor by
choosing his own secretary of state. In 1947 the law
was changed to make the Speaker of the House and
then the president pro tempore of the Senate next in
line for the presidency. But that created still other
problems: a Speaker or a president pro tempore is
likely to be chosen because of seniority, not executive
skill. and in any event might well be of the party
opposite to that occupying the White House.
Both problems were addressed in 1967 by the
Twenty-fifth Amendment to the Constitution. It
deals with the disability problem by allowing the vice
president to serve as "acting president" whenever the
pres ident declares that he is unable to discharge the
powers and duties of his office or whenever the vice
pres ident and a majority of the cabinet declare that
the president is incapacitated. If the president disagrees with the opinion of his vice president and a
majority of the cabinet, then Congress decides the
issue. A two-thirds majority is necessary to confirm
that the president is unable to serve.
The amendment deals with the success ion problem by requiring a vice president who assumes the
presidency (after a vacancy is created by death or resignation ) to nominate a new vice president. This perso n takes office if the nomination is confirmed by
a majority vote of both houses of Congress. When
there is no vice president, then the 1947 law governs: next in line are the Speaker. the Senate president. and the fifteen cab inet officers, beginning with
the secretary of state.
The disability problem has not arisen since the
adoption of the amendment, but the succession
problem has. In 1973 Vice President Spiro Agnew

Presidential Transition

403

resigned, hav ing pleaded no con test to crimina l
charges. President Nixon nominated Gerald Ford as
vice president, and after extensive hearings he was
confirmed by both houses of Con gress and sworn in.
Then on August 9, 1974, Nixon resigned the presidency- the first man to do so-and Ford became
president. He nominated as his vice president Nelson
Rockefeller, who was confirmed by both houses of
Congress- again, after extensive hearings- and was
sworn in on December 19, 1974. For the first time in
history, the nation had as its two principal executive
officers men who had not been elected to either the
presidency or the vice-presidency. It is a measure of
the legitimacy of the Constitution that this arrangement caused no crisis in pub lic opinion.

Impeachment
There is one other way- besides death, disability, or
resign ation- by which a president can leave office
before h is term expires. and that is by impeachment.
Not on ly the president and vice president, but also all
"civil officers of the United States " can be removed by
being impeached and convicted. As a practica l matter civil officers-cabinet secretaries, bureau chiefs.
and the li ke- are not subject to impeachment,
because the president can remove them at any time
and usua lly will if their behavior makes them a serious political liability. Federal judges, who serve during "good behavior"* and who are constitutionally
independent of the pres ident and Congress, have
been the most frequent objects of impeachment.
An impeachme nt is li ke an indi ctment in a criminal trial: a set of charges aga inst somebody, voted by
(in this case) the House of Representatives. To be
removed from office, the impeached officer must be
conv icted by a two-thirds vote of the Senate, which
sits as a court, is presided over by the Chief Justice,
hears the ev idence, and makes its decision u nder
whatever ru les it wishes to adopt. Sixteen persons
have been impeached by the House, and seven have
been convicted by the Senate. The last conviction was
in 1989, when two federal judges were removed from
offi ce.
Only two preSidents have ever been impeachedAndrew Johnson in 1868 and Bil l Cli nton in 1998 .

*" Good behavior" means a judge can stay in office until
he retires or dies, un less he or she is impeached and
convicted .

Representative Henry Hyde oJ lllinois (cente/; seated) chaired the
House Judiciary Com mittee when it and the Ju ll House voted to
impeach Presidellt Bill CLintoll ill 1998 Jar having lied under
oath. The Sel/ate did /wt COl/viet CLillton.

Richard Nixon would surely have been impeached in
1974, had he not resigned after the House Judiciary
Committee voted to recommend impeachment.
The Senate did not convict either Johnson or
Cli nton by the necessary two-thirds vote. The case
against Johnso n was entirely po litica l- Radical
Republicans, who wished to punish the South after
the Civil War, were angry at Johnson, a southerner,
who had a soft policy toward the South. The argument against him was flimsy.
Th e case against Clinton was more serious. The
House Ju diciary Committee, relying on the report of
independent counsel Kenneth Starr, charged Clinton
with perjury (lying under oath about his sexua l affair
with Mon ica Lewinsky), obstruction of justice (trying to block the Starr investigation), and abuse of
power (making fa lse written statements to the Judiciary Committee). The vote to impeach was passed by
the House along party lines. A majority, but not twothirds, of the Senate voted to convict.
Why did Clinton survive? There were many factors. The public dis liked his private beh avior. but did
not think it amounted to an impeachable offense. (In

impeachment Charges against a presid ent
approved by a majority of the House of
Representatives.

404

Chapter 14

The Presidency

Lame Duck

A lame duck is a politician whose power has
diminished because he or she is about to leave
office as a result of electoral defeat or statutory
limitation (for example, the president can serve
n o m ore than two terms).
The expression was first used in eighteenthcentury England, where it meant a "bankrupt
businessman." Soon it was used to refer to "bankrupt" politicians. Perhaps they were called "lame
ducks" because they had been shot on the wing
and, though still alive, could no longer fly.
A lame duck is not to be confused with a "sitting duck" (somebody who is an easy target).
Source: From Safire's Political Dictionary by William Satire. Copyright © 1968, 1972, 1978 by William Satire. Reprinted by permission of Random House, Inc. and the author.

fact. right after Lewinsky revealed her sexual affair
with him, his stand ing in opinion poIls went up.) The
economy was strong, and the nation was at peace.
Clinton was a centrist Democrat who did not offend
most voters.
The one casualty of the entire episode was the
death of the law creating the office of the Independent Counsel. Passed in 1978 by a Congress that was
upset by the Watergate crisis. the law directed the
attorney general to ask a three-judge panel to
appoint an independent counsel whenever a high

lame duck

A person stili in office after he or
she has lost a bid for reelection.

official is charged with serio us misconduct. (In
1993. when the 1978 law expired, Pres ident Clinton
asked that it be passed again. It was.) Eighteen people
were investigated by various independent counsels
from 1978 to 1999. In about half the cases, no
charges were brought to court.
For a long time Republicans disliked the law
because the counsels were investigating them. After
Clinton came to office, the counsels started investigating him and his associates, and so the Democrats
began to oppose it. In 1999, when the law expired, it
was not renewed .
A prob lem remains, however. How will any high
official. including the preSident. be investigated when
the attorney general. who does most investigations,
is part of the president's team? One answer is to let
Congress do it. but Congress may be controlled by the
president's party. No one has yet solved this puzzle.
Some Founders may have thought that impeachment would be used frequently against presidents,
but as a practical matter it is so complex and serious
an u ndertaking that we can probab ly expect it to be
reserved in the fu ture only for the gravest forms of
presidential misconduct. 0 one quite knows what a
high crime or misdemeanor is, but most scholars
agree that the charge must involve something ill egal
or unconstitutional. not just unpopular. Unless a
president or vice president is first impeached and
convicted, ma ny experts believe that he is not liable
to prosecution as would be an ordinary citizen. ( 0
one is certain, because the question has never arisen.) President Ford's pardon of Richard Nixon meant
that he could not be prosecuted under federal law for
things that he may have done while in office.
Students may find the occasions of misconduct or
disability remote and the details of succession or
impeachment tedious. But the problem is not
remote-succession has occurred nine times and disability at least twice-and what may appear tedious
goes, in fact . to the heart of the presidency. The first
and fundamental problem is to make the office legitimate. That was the great task George Washington
set himself. and that was the substantial accomplishment of his successors. Despite bitter and sometimes
violent partisan and sectional strife. beginning
almost immediately after Washington stepped down,
presidential succession has always occurred peacefu lly, without a military coup or a political plot. For
centuries. in the bygone times of kings as well as in
the present times of dictators and juntas, peaceful
succession has been a rare event among the nations

Six- Year Term for President
Delegates Divided on B' I
Ig SSue
October 15
EUDORA, KS
Here at the convention c I
ments to the United States a led to propose amendISSue facing the d I
ConstItutIon the ma '
.
e~~~ ~
,
p
presIdent to a sing/"'·
e proposa l to limit tbe
the measure claim . e. SIx-year term. Proponents of
MEMORANDUM
To: Delegate James Nagle
From : Robert Gilbert, legal staff
Subject: Six-year p residential term
The proposal to give the president a single six-year term is perhaps the most popular
amendment now before the convention . Polls suggest that it is supported by a sizable
percentage of the American people .
Arguments for:
1. Today a president no sooner learns the ropes after being elected for the first time
than he or she has to start preparing for the next election. A six-year term will give
the president a chance to govern for several years after learning how to be
president. This will lessen the extent to which political pressures dictate what the
president does.
2. Limited to a single term, the president need not cater to special-interest groups or
the media in deciding on policy. He or she can concentrate on what is good for the
country.
3. Many states have limited their governors to a single term.
Arguments against:
1. It is the need to win reelection that keeps the president (like any politician)
attentive to what the people want. A president unable to succeed himself or herself
will be tempted to ignore public opinion.
2. Limiting a president to a single term will not free him or her from the need to play
to the media or special-interest groups, since the formal powers of the presidency
are too weak to permit the incumbent to govern without the aid of Congress and
the press.
3. There is no evidence that presidents (such as Dwight Eisenhower) who served a
second term knowing that they could not run for reelection did a better or less
"political" job in the second term than in the first.
Your decision:
Favor amendment _ __
Oppose amendment _ __

406

Chapter 14

The Presidenc!}

of the world. Many of the critics of the Constitution
believed in 1 787 that peaceful succession wou ld not
happen in the Un ited States either: somehow the
president wou ld conni ve to hold offi ce for life or to
ha ndpi ck his successor. Their predictions were
wrong. though their fears are understa nd able.

*

How Powerful Is the
President?
Just as members o[ Co ngress bemoan their loss o[
power. so presidents bemoan theirs. Ca n both be
right?
In fact they ca n . If Congress is less able to control
events than it once was, it does not mean that the
presiden t is thereby more able to exercise control. The
federa l governmen t as a whole has become more constrained. so it is less able to act decisively. The chief
source of this constrain t is the greater complexity of
the issues with which Washin gton mu st dea l.
It was one thing to pass the Social Security Act in
1935: it is quite another thing to keep the Social
Security system adequately funded. It was one thing
for the nation to defend itself when attacked in 1941;

*

it is quite a nother to mainta in a consta nt military
prepared ness wh il e simulta neously explorin g possibilities for arms control. It was not hard to give pensions to vetera ns: it seems a lmost impossible today to
find the cure for drug abu se or juvenile crime.
In the fa ce of mod ern probl ems. a ll bran ches of
government. incl udin g the presidency. see m both big
a nd ineffectua l. Add to this the mu ch closer a nd
more critical scrutiny of the med ia and the proliferation of interest groups. a nd it is sma ll wonder that
both pres idents a nd members o[ Con gress feel that
they have lost power.
Presidents have come to acquire certa in rules of
thumb for dealing with their politica l problems.
Among them are these:

• Move it or lose it. A president who wants to get
something done should do it early in his term.
before his political innuence erodes.
• Avoid details. P resident Carter's lieutenants regret
havin g tried to do too mu ch . Better to have three
or four top pri orities a nd forget the rest.

• Cabinets don't get milch accompli shed; people
do. Find capable White House subordinates and
give them well-defined responsibility: then watch
them closely. 21

SUMMARY

A u.s.

president, chosen by the peopl e and with
powers derived [rom a written constitution, has
less power than does a British prime minister, even
though the latter depends entirely on the support of
his or her party in Parliament. The separation of
powers between the executive and legislative branches, the distinguishing feature of the American system, mea ns that the president must dea l with a
competitor- Congress- in setting policy and even in
managin g executive agencies.
Presidential power, though still sharply limited,
has grown fro m its constituti onal origin s as a result
of congressiona l delegation, the in creased importance of foreign affa irs. and publi c expectations. But
if the president today ha s more power, more is a lso
demanded of him . As a result how effective he is
depends not on any general grant of authority, but
on the nature of the issue that he confro nts and the
extent to which he ca n mobilize informa l sources of
power (public opinion, congressiona l support).

Though the president seemingly controls a vast
executive-branch apparatus. in fact he appoints but a
small portion of the officia ls. and the behavior of even
these is often beyond his easy control. Moreover, public
support, high at the beginning of any new presidency,
usually declines as the term proceeds. Consequently
each president must conserve his power (and his energy and time), concentrating these scarce resources to
deal with a few matters of major importance. Virtually
every president since Franklin Roosevelt has tried to
enlarge his ability to man age the executive branch- by
reorganization. by appoi nting White House aides. by
creati ng specia lized staff agencies-but no president
has been satisfied with the resu lts.
The exten t to which a president wi ll be weak or
powerfu l w ill vary with the kind of issue a nd the circumstances of the moment. It is a mi sta ke to spea k of
an "imperia l presidency" or of a n in effectual one. A
president's power is better assessed by considerin g
how he behaves in regard to specific issues.

Sllmmar!!
RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?

I. Did the Founders expect the presidenc.'l to be the
most important political institution?
Most did not. They worried about whether the presidency wou ld be too strong or too wea k, but designed
a Constitution hoping that Co ngress would be the
most important institution . And it was. with a few
excepti ons, until the twentieth century. Today the
strength of the presidency depends chielly on two
th in gs: the importance of milita ry and foreign
affairs. and the president's personal popularity.

2 . How important is the president's character in
determining 110w l1e governs?
Very importa nt. Presidents with great persona l skills.
such as Franklin Roosevelt, Dwight Eisenhower.
Ronald Reaga n. and Bill Clinton can influence public
opinion and that in turn inl1u ences Congress. But
character is not the whole story. Having a majority of
fellow believers in Congress. though rare, is important
(as it was for Roosevelt and Lyndon Johnson), and so
are unexpected events, such as wars and other crises.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. Should we alJOlish the electoral college?
There are big risks in doing that. If no president were
to win a majority of the popular vote (which happens
quite often). there would either have to be a runoff
election or the House would make the tlnal decision.
With an electoral college, small parties would playa
bigger role and the United States could politica lly come
to look like France or Italy. And without the college, a
presidential campaign might be waged in just a few big
states with the candidates ignoring most places.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

www.whitehouse.gov
www.ipl.org/ref/POTUS/
Icweb.loc.gov/globallexecutive/fed.html
www.interlink-cafe.com/uspresidents

2. Is it harder to govern wl1en the presidency and
Congress are controlled by different parties?

ot rea lly. Both the Democratic and Republica n parties have legislators who often vote with their party
riva ls. Unless the president has a big ideological
majority in Congress, something that does not happen too often, he can easily lose legislative struggles.
Gridlock does not in fact prevent major new pieces of
legislation from being passed.

407

408

Chapter 14

The Presidency

SUGGESTED READINGS
General

On Dwight D. Eisenhower

Corw in . Edwa rd S. Th e Presidellt: Office (/lui Powers. 5th ed. New
York: Ne w York University Press. 1985. Hi storical. co nstitu tional. a nd legal developm ent of th e ofl1ce.
Jones. Charles O. Passage to Ow Presidellcy (Washin gton. D. C.:
Brook in gs Institution. 1998). In sightfu l account of how lou r
pres ide nts- Nixon . Carter. Reagan. and Clinton- moved from
th e ca mpa ign to the preside ncy.
Neu stadt. Ric hard E. Presidelltial Power: Tile Politics oJ Leadership.
Rev. cd. New York: Wi ley. 1976. How presid ents try to acq uire
and ho ld pol itica l power in t he competiti ve wor ld of official
Wa shington . by a m <l n who has been both a schol a r and an
in sider.
Peterso n . Mark A. Legislatillg Together: The Wllite HOllse alld COIIgressJrom EisellllOwe r to Heagall. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 1990. Ch a ll en ges the conventi o na l view that .. the
pres ident proposes. Co n gress disposes." Co nta in s many excellent exa mp les of bargaining and cooperation between Con gress and th e executive branch .
Polsby. Nelson W.. and Aaron Wildausky. Presidelltial Electiolls.
10th cd. New York: Ch atham HOLlse. 20UO. Excellent analysis of how campaigns a nd th e electoral college shape th e
presidency.

Ambrose. Step hen E. EiseI1llOlve l: New York: Simon and Schu ster.
1984.
Green ste in . Fred I. TIl e Hiddw- Halld Presidenc!J: Eisellh olVer as
Leader. New York: Basic Books. 1982.

On Franklin D. Hooseve lt
Leuchtenberg. William E. Frallklill 0. Hoosevelt allli the {\Jew Deal.
7 932- 1940. lew York: Harper & Row. 19 63 .
Maney. Ri chard J. The Roosevelt Presellce. New York: Twayne. 199 2.

On Harry S Truman
Hamby. A. L. Beyond the {\Je w Deal: Harry S Tnl1l1all alld AllleriC!111
Liberali slI/. New York: Co lu mbia University Press. 1 973 .
McCu ll ou gh. David. Tru/llall. New York: Simon and Schu ster.
1984.

On John E Ke nnedy

J. Th e Promise alld the Peljo/'/llallce: Til e Leadership oJ
JOl111 E Ke111ledy. New York: Crown. 19 75 .
Parmet. Herbert C. Jack. New York: Dial Press. 1980.
Paper. Lewi s

On Lyndon B. Johnson
Caro. Robert A. Th e Years oJ L!llIdoll /OhIlSOI1. 3 vo ls. New York:
Alfred Knopf. 1982- 2002.
Da lle k. Robert. LO/w Star Hisilllllllld Flawed Giallt. Ne w Yo rk: Oxford
Uni versity Press. 1991 and 1996.
Kea rn s. Doris. LYlldoll /0111IS011 !11ul tile AmeriC!111 Dre!11l1 . New York:
Harper and Row. 19 76 .

On Hichard M. Nixon
Ambrose. Stephen Ii. NiXOII. 3 vol s. New York: Sim on and Schuster. 1987. 1989. 199 1.

On Jimmy Carter
Bourne. Peter G. Jilll1l1!1 Cllrtel: New York: Scr ibner. 199 7.

On Ronald Heaga n
Cannon. Lou. Presidell t Beagall. New York: Simon and Schuster.
1991.

On George H.W. Bush
Parmet. Herbert C. George Busli. New York: Scribner. 199 7 .

CHAPTER

15

The Bureaucracy

Distinctiveness of the American
Bureaucracy
The Growth of the Bureaucracy
The Appointment of Officials •
A Service Role • A Change in Role

Congressional Oversight
The Appropriations Committee and
Legislative Committees . The
Legislative Veto • Congressional
Investigations

Bureaucratic "Pathologies"
The Federal Bureaucracy Today
Recruitment and Retention • Personal
Attributes • Do Bureaucrats Sabotage
Their Political Bosses? • Culture and
Careers • Constraints • Agency Allies

Reforming the Bureaucracy

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

2.

What happened to make the
bureaucracy a " fourth branch" of
American national government?
What are the actual size and scope
of the federal bureaucracy?

T

I

2.

What should be done to improve
bureaucratic performance?
Is "red tape" all bad?

here is probably not a man or woman in the United States who has not,

~t some time or other, complained about "the bureaucracy." Your let-

ter was slow in getting to Aunt Minnie? The Internal Revenue Service took
months to send you your tax refund? The Defense Department paid $400
for a hammer? The Occupational Safety and Health Administration told you
that you installed the wrong kind of portable toilet for your farm workers?
The "bureaucracy" is to blame.
For most people and politicians bureaucracy is a pejorative word implying
waste, confusion, red tape, and rigidity. But for scholars-and for bureaucrats themselves-bureaucracy is a word with a neutral. technical meaning.
A bureaucracy is a large, complex organization composed of appointed
officials. By complex we mean that authority is divided among several managers; no one person is ab le to make all the decisions. A large corporation is
a bureaucracy; so also are a big university and a government agency. With
its sizable staff, even Congress has become, to some degree, a bureaucracy.
What is it about comp lex organizations in general. and government
agencies in particular, that leads so many people to comp lain about them?
In part the answer is to be found in their very size and complexity. But in
large measure the answer is to be found in the political context within
which such agenci es must operate. If we examine that context carefully, we
will discover that many of the problems that we blame on "the bureaucracy" are in fact the result of what Congress, the courts, and the president do.

Distinctiveness of the Alnerican
Bureaucracy
Bureaucratic government has become an obvious feature of all modern
societies. democratic and nondemocratic. In the United States. however.
three aspects of our constituti onal system and political traditions give to the
bureaucracy a distinctive character. First, political authority over the
bureaucracy is not in one set of hands but is shared among several institutions. In a parliamentary regime. such as in Great Britain, the appointed
officials of the national government work for the cabinet ministers. who are
in turn dominated by the prime minister. In theory. and to a considerable
extent in practice. British bureaucrats report to and take orders from
the ministers in charge of their departments, do not deal directly with Parliament. and rarely give interviews to the press. In the United States the

410

The Growth of the Bureaucracy
Constitution permits both the president and Congress to exercise authority over the bureaucracy.
Every senior appointed official has at least two masters: one in the executive branch and the other in the
legislative. Often there are many more than two:
Congress. after all, is not a single organization but a
collection of committees, subcommittees, and individua ls. This divided authority encourages bureaucrats to play one branch of government off against
the other and to make heavy use of the media.
Second, most of the agencies of the federa l government share their functions with related agencies
in state and local government. Though some federal
agencies deal directly with American citizens- the
Internal Revenue Service collects taxes from them,
th e Federal Bureau of Investigation looks into crimes
for them, the Postal Service delivers mail to themmany agencies work with other organizations at
other levels of government. For exa mple, the Department of Education gives money to local school systems; the Health Care Financing Administration in
the Department of Health and Human Services reimburses states for money spent on health care for
the poor; the Department of Housing and Urban
Development gives grants to cities for community
deve lopment; and the Employment and Training
Administration in the Department of Labor supplies
funds to local governments so that they can run jobtra inin g programs. In France, by contrast, government programs dea ling with education, health,
housing, and employment are centrally run, with little or no control exercised by local governments.
Third, the institutions and traditions of American
life have contributed to the growth of what some
writers have described as an "adversa ry culture," in
which the definition and expansion of personal
rights, and the defense of rights and cla ims through
lawsuits as well as political action, are given central
importance. A government agency in this country
operates under closer public scruti ny and with a
greater prospect of court cha ll enges to its authority
than in almost any other nation. Virtually every
important decision of the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration or of the Environmental Protection Agency is likely to be challenged in the courts
or attacked by an affected party; in Sweden the decisions of similar agencies go largely uncontested.
The scope as well as the sty le of bureaucratic government differs. In most Western European nations
the government owns and operates large parts of the

eco nomy: the French government operates the railroads and owns companies that make automobiles
and cigarettes. and the Italian government owns
many similar enterprises and also the nation's oil
refineries. In just about every large nation except the
United States, the telephone system is owned by the
government. Publicly operated enterprises account
for about 12 percent of all employment in France but
less than 3 percent in the United States. l The U.S.
government regulates privately owned enterprises
to a degree not found in many other countries. however. Why we should have preferred regulation to
ownership as the proper government role is an
interesting question to which we shall return.

The Growth of the
Bureaucracy
The Constitution made scarcely any provision for an
administrative system other than to allow the president to appoint, with the advice and co nsent of the
Senate, "amba ssadors, other public ministers and
consuls, judges of the Supreme Court, and all other
officers of the United States whose appointments are
not herein otherwise provid ed for, and which shall be
establi shed by law."2 Departments and bureaus were
not mentioned.
In the first Congress, in 1789, James Madison
introdu ced a bill to create a Department of State to
assist the new secretary of state. Thomas Jefferson,
in carrying out his duties. People appOinted to this
department were to be nominated by the president
and approved by the Senate, but they were "to be
removab le by the pres ident" alone. These six words.
which would confer the right to fire government officials, occasioned six days of debate in the House. At
stake was the locus of power over what was to
become the bureaucracy. Madison's opponents
argued that the Senate should conse nt to the
removal of officia ls as well as their appointment.
Madison responded that, without the unfettered
right of remova l, the president would not be able to
control his subordinates, and without this control
he wou ld not be able to discharge his constitutional

bureauc racy A large, compl ex organization
co mposed of appointed offi cials.

411

412

Chapter 15

The Bureaucracy

obligation to "take care that the laws be faithfully
executed."3 Madison won. twenty-nine votes to
twenty-two. When the issue went to the Senate,
another debate resulted in a tie vote, broken in favor
of the president by Vice President John Adams. The
Department of State, and all cabinet departments
subsequently created, would be run by people removable only by the president.
That decision did not resolve the question of who
would really control the bureaucracy, however. Congress retained the right to appropriate money, to
investigate the administration, and to shape the laws
that would be executed by that administration-more
than ample power to challenge any president who
claimed to have sole authority over his subordinates.
And many members of Congress expected that the
cabinet departments, even though headed by people
removable by the president, would report to Congress.
The government in Washington was at fir st
minuscule. The State Department started with only
nine employees; the War Department did not have
eighty civilian employees until 1801. Only the Treasury Department, concerned with collecting taxes
and finding ways to pay the public debt, had much
power, and only the Post Office Department provided
any significant service.

The Appointment of Officials
Small as the bureaucracy was, people struggled,
often bitterly, over who would be appointed to it.
From George Washington's day to modern times,
presidents have found appointment to be one of their
most important and difficult tasks. The officials that
they select affect how the laws are interpreted (thus
the political ideology of the job holders is important),
what tone the administration will display (thus personal character is important) , how effectively the
public business is discharged (thus competence is
important) , and how strong the political party or faction in power will be (thus party affiliation is important). Presidents trying to balance the competing
needs of ideology, character, fitness, and partisanship have rarely pleased most people. As John Adams
remarked, every appointment creates one ingrate
and ten enemies.
Because Congress, during most of the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries, was the dominant branch
of government, congressional preferences often controlled the appointment of officials. And since Congress was, in turn, a collection of people who

represented local interests, appointments were made
with an eye to rewarding the local supporters of members of Congress or building up local party organizations. These appointments made on the basis of
political co nsiderations- patronage-were later to
become a major issue. They galvanized various reform
efforts that sought to purify politics and to raise the
level of competence of the public service. Many of the
abuses that the reformers complained about were real
enough, but patronage served some useful purposes as
well. It gave the president a way to ensure that his subordinates were reasonably supportive of his policies; it
provided a reward that the president could use to
induce recalcitrant members of Congress to vote for
his programs; and it enabled party organizations to be
built up to perform the necessary functions of nominating candid ates and getting out the vote.
Though at first there were not many jobs to fight
over. by the middle of the nineteenth century there
were a lot. From 1816 to 1861 the number of federal employees increased eightfold. This expansion was
not, however, the result of the government's taking
on new functions but simply a result of the increased
demands on its traditional functions. The Post Office
alone accounted for 86 percent of this growth. 4
The Civ il War was a great watershed in bureaucratic development. Fighting the war led, naturally,
to hiring many new officials and creating many new
offices. Just as important, the Civil War revealed the
administrative weakness of the federal government
and led to demands by the civil service reform movement for an improvement in the quality and organization of federal employees. And finally, the war was
followed by a period of rapid industrialization and
the emergence of a national economy. The effects of
these developments could no longer be managed by
state governments acting alone. With the creation
of a nationwide network of railroads, commerce
among the states became increasingly important.
The constitutional powers of the federal government
to regulate interstate commerce, long dormant for
want of much commerce to regulate, now became
an important source of controversy.

A Service Role
From 1861 to 1901 new agencies were created, many
to deal with particular sectors of society and the economy. Over two hundred thousand new federal employees were added, with only about half of this increase
in the Post Office. The rapidly growing Pension Office

The Growth of the Bureaucracy

The Hollerithll1achine (leJO . invented by Herman Hollerith. helped the government cnlculate census data in the early part of the twentieth centu ry. Today. high-speed computers. such as those
used by air tmJlle controllers. do the job at great speed.

began paying benefits to Civil War veterans; the
Department of Agriculture was created in 1862 to
help farmers; the Department of Labor was founded in
1882 to serve workers; and the Department of Commerce was organized in 1903 to assist business people.
Many more specialized agencies. such as the National
Bureau of Standards. also came into being.
These agencies had one thing in common: their
role was primarily to serve. not to regulate. Most did
research. gathered statistics. dispensed federal lands.
or passed out benefits. Not until the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) was created in 1887 did the
federal government begin to regulate the economy
(other than by managing the currency) in any large
way. Even the ICC had. at first. relatively few powers.
There were severa l reasons why federal officials
primarily performed a service role. The values that
had shaped the Constitution were still strong: these
included a belief in limited government. the importance of states' rights. and the fear of concentrated
discretionary power. The proper role of government
in the economy was to promote. not to regulate. and
a commitment to laissez-faire-a freely competitive
economy- was strongly held. But just as important.
the Constitution said nothing about giving any regulatory powers to bureaucrats. It gave to Congress the
power to regulate commerce among the states. Now
obviously Congress could not make the necessary
day-to-day decisions to regu late. for examp le. the
rates that interstate railroads charged to farmers and

other shippers. Some agency or commlSSlOn composed of appointed officials a nd exper ts would have
to be created to do that. For a lon g time. however. the
prevailing interpretation of the Constitution was
that no such agency could exercise such regulatory
powers unless Congress first set down clear standards that would govern the agency's decisions. As
late as 1935 the Supreme Court held that a regulatory agency could not make rules on its own; it cou ld
only apply the standards enacted by Congress.5 The
Court's view was that the legislature may not delegate its powers to the president or to an administrative agency. 6
These restrictions on what administrato rs could
do were set aside in wartime. During World War I. [or
examp le. President Woodrow Wilson was authorized
by Congress to fix prices. operate the railroads. manage the communications system. and even contro l
the distribution o[ [00d. 7 This kind of extraordinary
grant of power usually ended with th e war.
Some changes in the bureaucracy did not end
with the war. Durin g the Civil War. World War I.
World War II. the Korean War. and the war in Vietnam. the number of civilian (as well as military)

laissez-faire

An economic theory that government should not regulate or interfere with
commerce .

413

414

Chapter 15

The Bureaucracy

employees of the government rose sharply. These
increases were not simply in the number of civilians
needed to help serve the war effort; many of the additional people were hired by agencies, such as the
Treasury Department, not obviously co nnected with
the war. Furthermore, the number of federal officials
did not return to prewar levels after each war.
Though there was some reduction, each war left the
number of federal employees larger than before.8
It is not hard to understand how this happens. During wartime almost every government agency argues
that its activities h ave some relation to the war effort,
and few legislators want to be caught voting against
something that may help that effort. Hence in 1944
the Reindeer Service in Alaska, a n agency of the Interior Department, asked for more employees because
reindeer are "a va lued asset in military planning. "

A Change in Role
Today's bureaucracy is largely a product of two events:
the depression of the 1930s (and the concomitant
New Deal program of President Roosevelt) and World
War II. Though many agencies have been added since
then, the basic features of the bureaucracy were set
mainly as a result of changes in public attitudes and in
constitutional interpretation that occurred during
these periods. The government was now expected to
play an active role in dealing with economic and social problems. In the late 1930s the Supreme Court
reversed its earlier decisions (see Chapter 16) on the
question of delegating legislative powers to administrative agencies and upheld laws by which Congress
merely instructs agencies to make decisions that serve
"the public interest" in some area. 9 As a result it was
possible for President Nixon to set up in 19 71 a system
of price and wage controls based on a statute that simply authorized the president "to issue such orders and
regulations as he may deem appropriate to stabilize
prices, rents, wages, and salaries."lOThe Cost of Living
Council and other agencies that Nixon established to
carry out this order were run by appointed officials
who had the legal authority to make sweeping decisions based on general statutory langu age.
World War II was the fir st occasion during which
the government made heavy use of federal income
taxes-on individuals and corporations- to finance
its activities. Between 1940 and 1945 tota l federal
tax co llections increased from about $5 billion to
nearly $44 billion . The end of the war brought no
substa nti al tax reduction: the country believed that a

high level of military preparedness continued to be
necessary and that various social programs begun
before the war should enjoy the heavy funding made
possible by wartime taxes. Tax receipts continued, by
and large, to grow. Before 191 3, when the Sixteenth
Amendment to the Constitution was passed, the federal government could not collect income taxes at all
(it financed itself largely from customs duties and
excise taxes). From 1913 to 1940 income taxes were
small (in 1940 the average American paid only $ 7 in
federal income taxes). World War II created the first
great financial boom for the government, permitting
the sustained expansion of a wide variety of programs and thus entrenching a large number of
ad ministrators in Washington.1 1
Although it is still too soon to tell, a third eventthe September 11 , 2001. terrorist attacks on the
United States- co uld affect bureaucracy as profoundly as the depression of the 1930s and World War II
did. A law creating a massive new cabinet agency. the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), was passed
in late 2002. Within two years of its creation, the DHS
had consolidated under its authority some twentytwo smaller federal agencies with nea rly 180.000 federal employees (third behind Defense and Veterans
Affairs) and over $40 billion in bud gets (four th
behind Defense, Health and Human Services, and
Education). In addition, dozens of intergovernmental
grant-making programs came under the authority of
the DHS. In late 2004 Congress passed anoth er law
that promised, over time, to centralize under a single
director of nation al intelligence the work of the over
seventy federal agencies authorized to spend money
on counterterrorist activities.

The Federal Bureaucracy
Today
No president wants to admit that he has increased
the size of the bureaucracy. He ca n avoid saying this
by pointing out that the number of civili a ns workin g
for the federal government, excl udin g postal workers.
has not increased significantly in recent years and is
about the same today (2 million persons) as it was in
1960, and less than it was durin g World War II. This
expla nation is true but misleading, for it neglects the
rou ghly 13 million people who work indirectly for
Washington as employees of private firms and state

The Federal Bureaucracy Today
Figure 15.1

The Real " Washington" Bureaucracy

17 Mill ion
Workers

Postal workers 0.9 m
Uniformed military 1.5 m

On federal
co ntracts
5.6 m

Federal c ivil
servants 1.9 m

On federal
grants 2.4 m

Working under federal
mandate for state or local
governments 4.6 m
Source: Paul C. Light, The True Size of Government (Washington, D.C. : Brookin gs Institution, 1999) Data for 1996.

or loca l agencies that are largely, if not entirely, supported by federal funds. As Figure 15 .1 shows, there
are nearly three persons earning their living indirectly from the federa l government for everyone
earning it directly, While federal employment has
remained quite stable, employment among federal
contractors and consultants and in state and local
governments has mushroomed, Indeed, most federal
bureaucrats. like most other people who work for the
federa l government, live outside Washington. D,C,
(see Figure 15.3 later in this chapter).
The power of the federal bureaucracy cannot be
measured by the number of employees, however, A
bureaucracy of five million persons would have little
power if each employee did nothing but type letters or
fil e documents, whereas a burea ucracy of only one
hundred persons would have awesome power if each
member were able to make arbitrary life-and-death
decisions affecting the rest of us. The power of the
bureaucracy depends on the extent to which appointed officials have discretionary a u thority- that is,
the ability to choose courses of action and to make
poliCies that are not spelled out in advance by laws. In
Figure 15.2 we see how the volume of regulations
issued and the amount of money spent have risen
much faster than the number of federal employees
who write the regulations and spend the money,
By this test the power of the federal bureaucracy
has grown enormously. Congress has delegated substantial auth ority to administrative agencies in three

areas: (1) paying subsidies to particular groups and
orga nizations in society (farmers, veterans, scientists, schools, universities, hospitals); (2) transferring
money from the federal government to state and
loca l governments (the gra n t-in-a id progra ms
described in Chapter 3) ; and (3) devising and enforcing regu lations for various sectors of society and the
economy, Some of these administrative functions,
such as grantS-in-aid to states, are closely monitored
by Congress; others, such as the regulatory programs, usually operate with a greater degree of independence, These delegations of power, especially in
the areas of paying subsidies and regulating the
economy, did not become commonpl ace until the
1930s, and then only after the Supreme Co urt decided that such delegations were constitutionaL Today,
by co ntrast, appointed officials can decide, within
rather broad limits, who shall own a television station , what safety features a utomobiles shall have,
what kinds of scientific research shall be specially
encouraged, what drugs shall appear on the market,
which dissident groups shall be investigated, what
fumes an industrial smokestack may emit, which
corporate mergers shall be allowed, what use shall be
made of nation al forests, and what prices crop and
dairy farmers shall receive for their products.
If appointed officials have this kind of power, then
how they use it is of paramount importance in
und ers tandin g modern government. There are,
broad ly, four factors that may explain the behav ior of
these officials:
1. The manner in which they are recruited and
rewarded
2. Their personal attributes, such as their socioeconomic backgrounds and their political attitudes
3, The nature of their jobs
4. The constraints that outside forces-political
superiors, legislators, interest gro ups, journalists-impose on their agencies

Recruitment and Retention
The federal civil ser vice system was designed to
recruit qualified people on the basis of merit, not

discr e tionary aut hority The extent to which
a ppo inted burea ucrats can choose courses of
action and make poli cies that are not spe lled
out in advance by laws.

41 5

4 16

Figure 15.2

Chapter 15

Th e Bureaucracy

Federal Government: Money. People. and
Regulations
EXPENDITURES

50

"-

40

o
'-'
'0 30
Q)

OJ)

2

:ii

20

u

Qj

"-

10

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1990

2000

2010

1990

2000

2010

EMPLOYMENT
4

if>

C

"
3

c

c

Q)

E
1)'

a.

2

E
Q)

c

.~

'>
u

'"
'0

J-

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

REGULATIONS
90

Vi
-0

~ 80

:::>

o

:S 70

2
if>

60

'00
Q)

0::

ro

Qj
~

50
40

"c
if>
Q)

30

OJ)

'"
~

20

Qj

~

10

:::>

Z

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

Sources. Expendit ures and employme nt Statistical Abstract of th e United
States, 2000, Nos. 483 and 582 ; regulations: Harold W Stanley and
Richard G. Niemi, Vital Statistics on American Politics (Washington, D.c.:
Congressional Quarterly Press, 1998), ta bles 6- 12, 6-14. Post-2000 data

updated by Marc Siegel.

po litical pa tronage, and to reta in a nd pro mote
employees on the basis of performance, not political
favoritism. Many appointed federal offi cials belong to
the competitive ser vice. This means that they are
appo inted on ly after they h ave passed a written
examination administered by the Ofllce of Personnel
Management (OPM) or met certain selection criteria
(such as training, educational attainments , or prior
exper ience) devised by the hiring agency a nd
approved by the OPM. Wh ere competition for a job
exists a nd cand idates ca n be ranked by their scores or
records, the agency must usually appoint one of the
three top-ranking cand idates.
In recent years the competitive service system has
become decentralized, so that each agency now hires
its own people withou t a n OPM referral , a nd examinations have become less common. In 19 52 more
th a n 8 6 percent of all federal employees were civil
servan ts hired by the competitive service; by 199 6
th at figure had fa ll en to less than 54 percent. This
decentralization a nd the greater use of ways other
tha n exams to hire employees were caused by three
things. First. the old OPM system was cumbersome
and often not relevant to the comp lex needs of
depa rtments. Second , these agencies had a need for
more professionally trained employees-lawyers.
biologists, engineers. a nd computer speCialists- who
could not be ranked on the basis of so me standard
exam . And third , civil rights groups pressed Washington to make the racial composition of the federal
bureaucracy loo k more li ke the racial composition of
the n ation.
Thu s it is wrong to suppose that a sta ndardized,
centralized system governs the federal service. As
one recent study co ncluded, tod ay much of the "real
responsibi lity for recrui ting, tes ting , a nd hiring
has shifted to the agen cies from OPM and its central
system ,"12
Moreover, the kinds of workers being recruited
in to the federal civil service have ch a nged. For exa mple. blue-co llar employmen t fell from 2 6 percent of
th e federal work force in 1973 to 16 percent in
1993 . Meanwhile, the federal government's white-

compet itive service The government offices
t o which people are appointed on the basi s of
merit. as ascertained by a w ritten exam or by
appl ying certain selection criteria.

The Fe deral Btl reaucracy Today
collar work force has become more diverse occupationally. As one writer on civil serv ice reform has
noted. the "need to recruit and retain physicists.
biologists. oceanographers. nurses. statisticians.
botanists. and epidemiologists. as well as large numbers of engineers. lawyers. and accountants. now
preoccupies federal personnel managers. " 13
Employees hired outside the competitive service
are part of the excepted service. They now make up
almost hair or all workers. Though not hired by the
OPM. they still are typically hired in a nonpartisan
fashion. Some are hired by agencies-such as the
CIA. the FBI. an d the Postal Service-that have their
own selection procedures.
About 3 percent or the excepted employees are
appointed on grounds other than or in addition to
merit. These lega l exceptions exist to permit the president to select. for policy-making and politically sensitive posts. people who are in agreement with his
policy views. Such appointments are gene rally of
three kinds:
1. Presidential appointments a uthorized by statute
(cabinet and subcabinet offi cers. judges. U.S. marshals and U.S. attorneys. ambassadors. and members of various boards and commiss ions).
2. "Schedul e C" appointments to jobs that are
described as having a "confidential or policydetermining character" below the level of cabinet
or subcabinet posts (including executive assistants. special aides. and confidential secretaries).
3. Noncareer executive assignments (NEAs) given to
high-ranking members or the regular competitive civ il service or to persons brought into the
civil service at these high levels. These people are
deeply involved in the advocacy of presidential
programs or participate in policy-making.
These three groups of excepted appointments
constitute the patronage available to a president and
his administration. When President Kennedy took
office in 1961 . he had 451 political jobs to fill. When
President George W. Bush took office in 2001. he had
more than four times that number. incl uding nearly
four times the number of top cabinet posts. Scholars
disagree over whether this proliferation or political
appointees has improved or worsened Was hington 's
performance. but one thing is clear: widespread presidential patronage is hardly unprecedented. In the
nineteenth century practically every federal job was

Federal employees aren't just paper slnifjIers; many. such
as this biologist. perform skilled professional tasks.

a patronage job. For example. when Grover Cleveland. a Democrat. became president in 1885. he
replaced some forty thousand Republican postal
employees with Democrats.
Ironica lly. two years earlier. in 1883. the passage
or the Pendleton Act had begun a slow but steady
transfer of federal jobs from the patronage to the
merit system. It may seem strange that a political
party in power (the Republicans) would be wil ling to
relinquish its patronage in favor of a merit-based
appointment system. Two factors made it possible for
the Republicans to pass the Pendleton Act: (1) public
outrage over the abuses of the spoils system. highlighted by the assassination of President Ja mes
Garfield by a man always described in the history
books as a "disappointed office seeker" (lunatic would
be a more accurate term); and (2) the fear that ir the
Democrats came to power on a wave of antispoils

417

418

Chapte r 15

The Bureaucracy

HOW THINGS WORK
A Day in the Life of a Bureaucrat
Here is how the commissioner of the Social Security
Administration (SSA), a high-level bureaucrat, spent
a typical day:
5:45
6:50
7:30
8:00
8:30

A.M .
A .M.
A .M .
A .M .
A.M .

9:45 A .M.
10:05 A .M.
11 :30 A .M.
1 :00 P.M.
2:45

P.M.

Arise.
Leave for the office.
Read newspapers.
Meet with deputy commissioner.
Brief cabinet secretary on Social Security
data .*
Decide how to respond to press criticisms.
Leave for meeting in another building .
Meet with top staff.
Meet with bureau chiefs on half a dozen
issues.
Meet with a deputy to discuss next year's
budget.

sentiment, existing Republica n offi ceholders wo uld
be fired. (The Democra ts won a nyway.)
The merit system spread to enco mpass most of the
federa l bureau cracy, genera lly w ith pres identia l suppor t. Though presidents may have liked in theory the
id ea of hiri ng and firin g subord inates at w ill. m ost
fe lt that the dema nd s for patro nage were impossibl e
eit her to satisfy or to igno re. Furthermore, by
increasing the coverage of the merit system a presiden t co u ld "bla nket in " pa tron age ap po intees
a lready h olding offi ce, thus making it difficult or
imposs ible for the next admin istration to fi re them .
• The Buddy System The actua l recruitment of civil
servants. especially in middle- and upper-level jobs, is
somewhat more complicated. and slightly more political, than the laws and rules migh t suggest. Though
many people enter the federa l burea ucracy by learn-

A job that is filled by a person whom an agency has already identified.

name-request job

3:30

P. M.

4:30

P. M.

5:10

P.M.

6:10

P.M .

Meet with business executive about use
of computers in SSA.
Meet with deputy in charge of Medicare to
discuss plan for national health insurance.
Catch up on phone calls; meet with com mittee concerned w ith drug abuse .
Leave for home . Get out of attending a
dinner meeting in Washington .

As is obvious, high-level bureaucrats spend most
of their time discussing things in meetings. It is in
such meetings that government policy is made.
*SSA was part of the Department of Health and Human Services but
no longer is.

Source: Adapted from" A Day in the Life of a Government Executive,"
in Inside the System, ed. Charles Peters and Nicholas Leamann, 4th
ed . (New York : Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1979), 205-213.

ing of a job, filling out an applica tion, perhaps tak ing
a test, and being hired, many also enter on a "namerequest" basis. A name-request job is one that is
fi lled by a person whom a n agency has a lready identified. In this respect the federa l government is not so different from private business . A person learns of a job
fro m somebody who already has one, or the head of a
burea u decides in adva nce whom he or she wishes to
hire. The agency must still send a form describing the
job to the OPM, but it a lso na mes the person wh om the
agency wants to appoint. Sometimes the job is even
described in such a way that the person named is the
only one who ca n qualify for it. Occasionally this tailor-made, na me-request job is offered to a person at the
insistence of a member of Congress who wa nts a politica l supporter taken care of: more often it is made
ava ilable because the bureaucracy itself knows whom
it wishes to hire and wants to circumvent a n elaborate
search . This is the "buddy system."
The buddy system does not necessar ily produce
poo r employees. Indeed, it is frequ ently a way of hiring people known to the agency as bein g ca pable of
ha nd ling the position . It a lso opens up the possib ili ty

The Federal Bureaucracy Today
of hiring people whose policy views are co ngenial to
those already in office. Such networking is based on
shared po licy views, not (as once was the case) on
narrow pa rtisan affiliations. For exa mp le, bureaucrats in co nsumer protection agencies recruit new
staff from private groups with an interest in consumer protection, such as the various organizations
associated with Ralph Nader, or from academics who
have a proconsumer inclination.
There has always been a n informal "old boys'
network" among those who move in and out of
high-level government posts; with the increasing
appo intment of women to these jobs, there has
begun to emerge an old girls ' network as well. l4 In a
later section we will consider whether, or in what
ways , these recruitment patterns make a difference.
Firing a Bureaucrat The great majority of
burea ucrats who are part of the civil service and
who do not hold presidential appointments have jobs
that a re, for all practical purposes, beyond reach. An
executive must go through elaborate steps to fire,

•

demote, or suspend a civil serva nt. Realistically this
mea ns that no one is flred or demoted unless his or
her superior is prepared to invest a great deal of time
a nd effort in the attempt. In 1987 about 2,600
employees who had completed their probationary
period were fired for misco nduct or poor performance. That is about one-tenth of 1 percent of a ll fed eral employees. It is hard to believe that a large
pri vate company would fire only one-tenth of 1 percent of its workers in a given yea r. It's also impossible
to beli eve that, as is often th e case in Wash ington, it
would take a year to fire anyone. To cope with this
problem, federal executives have devised a number of
stratagems for bypassing or forcing out civil servants
with whom they cannot work-denying them promotions , transferring them to undesirable locations,
or assign ing them to meaningless work.
With the passage of the Civil Service Reform Act
of 19 78 Co ngress recognized that many high-level
positions in the civil service have important policymaking responsibilities and that the pres ident and
his cabinet offi cers ought to have more fl exibility in

One barrier to improving preSidential ('antral of the federa l bureaucracy is that even tire White
HOllse has become a large bureallcra('y.

419

420

Chapter 15

The Bureaucracy

HOW THINGS WORK

Firing a Bureaucrat
To fire or demote a member of the competitive civil
service, these procedures must be followed :
1. The employee must be given written notice at

least thirty days in advance that he or she is to be
fired or demoted for incompetence or misconduct.
2. The written notice must contain a statement of
reasons, including specific examples of unacceptable performance.
3. The employee has the right to an attorney and to
reply, orally or in writing, to the charges.

recruiting. assign ing. and paying su ch people.
Accordingly, the act created the Senior Executive Service (SES), about eight thousand top federal managers who can (in theory) be hired, fired, and
transferred more easily than ord inary civil servants.
Moreover. the act stipul ated that members of the SES
wou ld be el igible for substa nti a l cash bonuses if they
performed their duties well. (To protect the rights of
SES members, anyone who is removed from the SES
is guaranteed a job elsewhere in the government.)
Things did not work out quite as the spon sors of
the SES had hoped. Though most eligible civil serva nts joined it, there was only a modest increase in
the proportion of higher-ranking positions in agencies th at were filled by transfer from anoth er agency;
the cash bonuses did not prove to be an important
incentive (perhaps beca use the base salaries of top
bureaucrats did not keep up with inflation); and
hardly any member of the SES was actually fired.
Two years after the SES was created, less than onehalf of 1 percent of its members had received an
unsatisfactory rating. and none had been fired. Nor
does the SES give the president a large opportunity to
make political appo in tments: on ly 10 percent of the
SES can be selected from outside the existing civil
serv ice. And no SES member can be transferred
invo luntarily.
• The Agency's Point of View When one realizes
that most agencies are sta ffed by people who were
recruited by those agencies. sometimes on a name-

4 . The employee has the right to appeal any adverse

action to the Merit Systems Protection Board
(MSPB), a three-person, bipartisan body appointed
by the president with the consent of the Senate.
5. The MSPB must grant the employee a hearing, at
which the employee has the right to have an
attorney present.
6. The employee has the right to appeal the MSPB
decision to a U.s. court of appeals, wh ich can hold
new hearings.

request basis, and who are virtua lly immune from
dismissal, it becomes clear that the recruitment and
retention policies of the civil service work to ensure
that most bureaucrats will have an "agency" point of
view. Even with the enco uragement for transfers crea ted by the SES. most governme nt agencies are dominated by people who have not served in any other
agency and who have been in government service
most of their lives. This fact has some adva ntages: it
means that most top-tier bureaucrats are experts in
the procedures and policies of their agencies a nd that
there will be a substantial degree of continuity in
agency behavior no matter which political party
h appens to be in power.
But the agency point of view has its costs as well. A
political executive entering an agency with responsibility for shaping its direction will discover that he or
she must carefully win the support of career subordinates. A subordinate has an infinite capacity for discreet sabotage and can make life miserable for a
political superior by delaying action, withholdin g
information. following the rule book with literal exactness, or making an "end run" around a superior to
mobilize members of Congress who are sympathetic to
the burea ucrat's point of view. For instance, when one
political executive wanted to downgrade a bureau in
his department, he found , natura lly, that the burea u
chief was opposed. The burea u chief spoke to some
friend ly lobbyists and a key member of Congress .
When the political executive asked the congressman
whether he had any problem with the contemplated

The Federal Bureaucracy Today
reorganization, the congressman replied, "No, you
have the problem, because if you touch that burea u,
I' ll cut your job out of the budget."15

Personal Attributes
A seco nd factor that might shape the way burea ucrats use their power is their perso nal attributes.
These include their socia l class, education, and personal poli tical beliefs. The federa l civi l service as a
whole looks very much like a cross section of American society in the education, sex, race, and social origins of its members (see Figure 15. 3). But as with
many other employers, African America ns and other
minorities are most likely to be heav ily represented in
the lowest grade levels and tend to be underrepresented at the executive level (see Ta ble 15.1). At
the higher-ranking levels, where the most power
is found-say, in the supergrade ranks of GS 16

Figure 15.3

throu gh GS 18- the typical civil servant is a middleaged white male with a college degree whose father
was somewhat more advantaged than the average
citize n. In the great majori ty of cases this individual
is in fact very different from the typical American in
both background and personal beliefs .
Because political appointees and career burea ucrats are unrepresentative of the average American,
and beca use of their supposed occupational self-interest, some critics have speculated that the people holding these jobs think about politics and government in
ways very different from the pub lic at large. The
results of a 1998 survey would seem to prove them
right: 57 percent of average citizens, versus 76 percent of career bureaucrats and 88 percent of Clinton
administration appointees, descr ibed themselves as
progovernment; 60 percent of all Americans , compared to just 4 percent of all career burea ucrats and

Characteristics of Federal Civilian Employees, 1960 and 1999

Total number of employees

1960
Sex

1999

1960

2.2 mil li on

1999

2.1 mil li on

Male 75%
~----------------------------------------------~

Female 25%
Fema le 44 .9%

Male 55.1%

~--------------------------------~

1960 White/Minority data for 1960 unava il ab le
Race
White 69. 6%

1999

Department
Employing 1960 ....._ _ _ _ _ _Defense
___
_ _ _ _44%
_......

Postal Service 23%

Minority· 30.4%

All other 33%

Agency
1999

Defense Department 29.3%

Postal Service 47.9%

Al l other 22 .7%

1960

11%

Elsewhere 89%

1999

11 %

Elsewhere 89%

Location

In Washington area
' Blacks, Native Amer icans, Hispanics, Asians, and Pacific Islanders

Sources: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 7967, 392-394; Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2000, Nos. 450, 482, 500,
595, 1118.

421

42 2

Chapter 1 5

n.bIe 15.1

The Bureaucracy

Minorit~

Employment in the Federal
Bureaucracy by Rank. 2000
Percent age
of Total

Grade

GS 1-4
GS 5- 8
GS 9- 12
GS 13- 15
SES
Tot al

Black

Hispanic

Black

Hispanic

26,895
99,937
82,809
31,494
1,180
298,701

8,526
31,703
36,813
12,869
547
115,247

29.7 %
27.0
16.0
10.3
7.3
17.0

9.4%
8.6
7.0
4. 2
3.4
6.7

Note: GS sta nds for " Genera l Service." The higher the number, the
higher the rank of people with that number.
Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2001, 482 .

Clinton appointees. agreed that most popular criticisms of the federal government were justilled; about
a third of the public, but under a llfth or the career
and appointed public servants, described themselves
as conservative; and only 13 or 14 percent of those in
government agreed th at the public knew enough
about the issues to form wise opinions on policy. J (,
It . is important, however, not to overgeneralize
from such differences. For example, whereas Clinton
appointees (virtu ally all of them strong Democrats)
were more liberal th a n average citizens, Reagan
appointees (virtually all of them loyal Republica ns)
were undoubtedly more conservative than average
citizens. Likewise, career civil servants are more progovernment than the public at large, but on most
specific policy questions, federal bureaucrats do not
have extreme positions. They don't, for example.
think that the government should take over the big
corporations, they support some amount of business
deregulation, and a majority (by a slim margin) don't
think that the goal of U.S. fo reign policy has been to
protect business. I 7
We can also see. however, that the kind of agency
for which a bureaucrat works makes a difference.
Those employed in "activist" agencies, such as the
Federal Trade Commission. Environmental Protection
Agency, and Food a nd Drug Administration, have
much more liberal views than those who work for the
more "traditional" agencies. such as the departments
of Agriculture, Commerce. and the Treasury.
This association between attitudes a nd kind of
agency has been confirmed by other studies. Even

when the burea ucrats come from ro ughly the sa me
social backgro unds, their policy views seem to reflect
the type of government work that they do. For exa mple. people holding foreign service jobs in the Sta te
Department tended to be more liberal tha n those
coming from similar family backgrounds and performing simil ar tasks (such as working on foreign
affairs) in the Defense Department. I S It is not clear
whether these differences in attitudes were produ ced
by the jobs that they held or whether certain jobs
attract people with cer tai n beliefs. Probably both
forces were at work.
Whatever the mechanism involved. there seems little doubt that different agencies display different political ideologies. A study done in 1976 revealed that
Democrats and people with liberal views tended to be
overrepresented in social service agencies, whereas
Republicans a nd people with conservative views tend
to be overrepresented in defense agencies. 19

Do Bureaucrats Sabotage Their
Political Bosses?
Because it is so hard to fi re ca reer bureaucrats. it is
often said that these people will sabotage any actions
by their political superiors with which they disagree.
And sin ce civil servants tend to have liberal views, it
h as been conser vative presidents and cabinet secreta ries who have usu ally expressed this worry.
There is no doubt that some bureaucrats will drag
th eir heels if they don't like th eir bosses. a nd a few
wi ll block actions they oppose. However. most
bureaucrats try to ca r ry out the policies of their
superiors even when they personally disagree with
them. When David Stockma n was director of the
OMB. he set out to make sharp cuts in government
spending progra ms in accordance with the wishes of
his boss, President Reagan. He later published a book
complaining about all the people in the White House
a nd Congress who worked aga inst him.20 But
nowhere in the book is there a ny major criticism of
the civil serva nts at the OMB. It appears that wha tever these people though t about Stockma n a nd Reagan , they loya lly tried to carry out Stockma n 's
policies.
Bureaucrats tend to be loyal to political superiors
who dea l with them cooperatively and constructively. An agency head who tries to ignore or discredit
them can be in for a to ugh time, however. The powers of obstruction available to aggrieved bureaucrats

The Federal Bureaucracy Today
are formidable . Such people can leak embarrassing
stories to Congress or to the media, help interest
groups mobilize against the agency head, and discover a thousand procedural reasons why a new
course of action won't work.
The exercise of some of those bureaucratic powers is
protected by the Whistle Blower Protection Act. Passed
in 1989, the law created the Office of Special Counsel,
charged with investigating complaints [rom bmeaucrats that they were punished alter reporting to Congress about waste, fraud, or abuse in their agencies.
It may seem odd that bureaucrats, who have great
job security, would not always act in accordance
with their personal beliefs instead of in accordance
with the wishes of their bosses. Bureaucratic sabotage, in this view, ought to be very common. But
bureaucratic cooperation with superiors is not odd.
once you take into account the nature of a bureaucrat's job.
If you are a voter at the polls, your beliefs will
clearly affect how you vote (see Chapter 7). But if you
are the second baseman for the Boston Red Sox, your
political beliefs, social background. and education
will have nothing to do with how you field ground
balls. Sociologists like to call the different things that
people do in their lives "roles " and to distinguish
between roles that are loosely structured (such as the
role of voter) and those that are highly structured
(such as that of second baseman). Personal attitudes
greatly affect loosely structured roles and only slightly affect highly structured ones. Applied to the federal bureaucracy, this suggests that civil servants
performing tasks that are routinized (such as filling
out forms), tasks that are closely defined by laws and
rules (such as issuing welfare checks) , or tasks that
are closely monitored by others (supervisors, specialinterest groups. the media) will probably perform
them in ways that can only partially be explained, if
at all , by their personal attitudes. Civil servants performing complex, loosely defined tasks that are not
closely monitored may carry out their work in ways
powerfully influenced by their attitudes.
Among the loosely defined tasks are those performed by professionals, and so the values of these
people may influence how they behave. An increasing number of lawyers, economists, engineers, and
physicians are hired to work in federal agencies.
These men and women have received extensive training that produces not only a set of skills, but also a set
of attitudes as to what is important and valuable. For

example. the Federal Trade Commission (FTC),
charged with preventing unfair methods of competition among businesses, employs two kinds of professionals- lawyers, organized into a Bureau of
Competition, and economists, organized into a
Bureau of Economics. Lawyers are trained to draw
up briefs and argue cases in court and are taught the
legal standards by which they will know whether
they have a chance of winning a case or not. Economists are trained to analyze how a competitive economy works and what costs consumers must bear if
the goods and services are produced by a monopoly
(one firm controlling the market) or an oligopoly (a
small number of firms dominating the market).
Because of their training and attitudes, lawyers in
the FTC prefer to bring cases against a business firm
that has done something clearly illegal, such as
attending secret meetings with competitors to rig the
prices that will be charged to a purchaser. These
cases appeal to lawyers because there is usually a victim (the purchaser or a rival company) who complains to the government, the illegal behavior can be
proved in a court of law, and the case can be completed rather quickly.
Economists, on the other hand, are trained to measme the value of a case not by how quickly it can be
proved in comt, but by whether the illegal practice
imposes large or small costs on the consumer. FTC
economists often dislike the cases that appeal to
lawyers. The economists feel that the amount of
money that such cases save the consumer is often
small and that the cases are a distraction from the
major issues- such as whether IBM unfairly dominates the computer business or whether General
Motors is too large to be efficient. Lawyers, in turn, are
leery of big cases, because the facts are hard to prove
and they may take forever to decide (one blockbuster
case can drag through the courts for ten years). In
many federal agencies divergent professional values
such as these help explain how power is used.

Culture and Careers
Unlike the lawyers and economists working in the
FTC, the government bureaucrats in a typical agency
don't have a lot of freedom to choose a course of
action. Their jobs are spelled out not only by the laws,
rules, and routines of their agency, but also by the
informal understandings among fellow employees as
to how they are supposed to act. These understandings are the culture of the agency. 21

423

424

Chapter 15

The Bureaucracy

If you belong to the air force, you can do a lot of
things, but only one thing really counts: flying airplanes, especially advanced jet fighters and bombers.
The culture of the air force is a pilots' culture. If you
belong to the navy, you have more choices: fly jet aircraft or operate nuclear submarines. Both jobs provide status and a chance for promotion to the highest
ranks. By contrast, sailing minesweepers or transport ships (or worse, having a desk job and not sailing anything at all) is not a very rewarding job. The
culture of the CIA emphasizes working overseas as a
clandestine agent; staying in Washington as a report
writer is not as good for your career. The culture of
the State Department rewards skill in political negotiations; being an expert on international economics
or embassy security is much less rewarding.
You can usually tell what kind of culture an
agency has by asking an employee. "If you want to
get ahead here, what sort of jobs should you take?"
The jobs that are ca reer enhancing are part of the
culture; the jobs that are not career enhancing (NCE
in bureaucratic lingo) are not part of it.
Being part of a strong culture is good- up to a
point. It motivates employees to work hard in order
to win the respect of their coworkers as well as the
approval of their bosses. But a strong culture also
makes it hard to change an agency. FBI agents for
many years resisted getting involved in civil rights or
organized crime cases, and diplomats in the State
Department didn't pay much attention to embassy
security. These important jobs were not a careerenhancing part of the culture.

Constraints
The biggest difference between a government agency
and a private organization is the vastly greater number of constraints on the agency. Unlike a business
firm , the typical government bureau cannot hire,
fire, build , or sell without going through procedures
set down in laws. How much money it pays its members is determined by statute, not by the market. Not
only the goals of an agency but often its exact procedures are spelled out by Congress.
At one time the Soil Conservation Service was
required by law to employ at least 14,177 full-time
workers. The State Department is forbidden by law
[rom opening a diplomatic post in Antigua or Barbuda but forbidden from closing a post anywhere else.
The Agency for International Development (which
administers our foreign-aid program) has been given

by Congress 33 objectives and 75 priorities and must
send to Congress 288 reports each year. When it
buys military supplies, the Defense Department must
give a "fair proportion" of its contracts to small businesses, especially those operated by "socially and
economically disadvantaged individuals ," and must
buy from American firms even if. in some cases, buying abroad would be cheaper. Some of the more general constraints include the following:
• Administrative Procedure Act (1946). Before
adopting a new rule or policy, an agency must give
notice, solicit comments, and (often) hold hearings.
• Freedom of Information Act (1966). Citizens have
the right to inspect all government records except
those containing military, intelligence, or trade
secrets or revealing private personnel actions.
• National Environmenta l Policy Act (1969). Before
undertaking any major action affecting the environment, an agency must issue an environmental
impact statement.
• Privacy Act (1974). Government files about individuals, such as Social Security and tax records,
must be kept confidential.
• Open Meeting Law (1976). Every part of every
agency meeting must be open to the public unless
certain matters (for example, military or trade
secrets) are being discussed.
One of the biggest constra ints on bureaucratic
action is that Congress rarely gives any job to a single
agency. Stopping drug trafficking is the task of the
Customs Service, the FBI, the Drug Enforcement
Administration, the Border Patrol, and the Defense
Department (among others). Disposing of the assets of
failed savings-and-Ioan associations is the job of the
Resolution Funding Corporation, Resolution Trust
Corporation, Federal Housing Finance Board , Office of
Thrift Supervision in the Treasury Department, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Reserve
Board, and Justice Department (among others).
The effects of these constraints on agency behavior are not surprising.
• The government will often act slowly. (The more
constraints that must be satisfied, the longer it will
take to get anything done.)
• The government will sometimes act inconsistently. (What is done to meet one constraint- for
example, freedom of information- may endanger
another constraint- for example, privacy.)

The Federal Bureaucracy Today

The " Rules"

425

of Politics

Learning Bureaucratese
A few simple rules, if remembered, will enable you
to speak and write in the style of a government
official.

• Never use ordinary words where unusual ones can
be found. Don't say that you "made a choice"; say
that you "selected an option ."

• Use nouns as if they were verbs. Don't say,
"We must set priorities"; say instead, "We must
prioritize. "

• No matter what subject you are discussing,
employ the language of sports and war. Never
say, "progress"; say, "breakthrough." Never speak
of a "comprom ise "; instead consider "adopting a
fallback position ."

• Use adjectives as if they were verbs. Don't say,
"We put the report in final form"; say instead,
"We finalized the report."

• Avoid active verbs. Never say, "Study the problem"; say instead, "It is felt that the problem
should be subjected to further study."

• Use several words where one word would
do. Don't say, "now"; say instead, "at this point
in time."

i

MIS.> V\lATS"oN, rui<N

50Me=: OF THE'5E:- NOUN..>
INT'O vefZG5 Fo~ M!?
1\ ~ NYYY\
I: WANi THI.$" To fOuND -=::-.
~-

IMP~"AN"".

• It will be easier to block action than to take action.

(The constraints ensure that lots of voices will be
heard; the more voices that are heard, the more
they may cancel each other out.)
• Lower-ranking employees will be reluctant to make
decisions on their own. (Having many constraints
means having many ways to get into trouble: to
avoid trouble, let your boss make the decision.)
• Citizens will complain of red tape. (The more constraints to serve, the more forms to fill out.)
These constraints do not mean that government
bureaucracy is powerless, only that, however great
its power, it tends to be clumsy. That clumsiness arises not from the fact that the people who work for
agencies are dull or incompetent, but from the complicated political environment in which that work
must be done.

The moral of the story: the next time you get mad
at a burea ucrat, ask yourself, Why would a rational,
intelligent person behave that way? Chances are you
will discover that there are good reasons for that
action. You would probably behave the same way if
you were working for the same organization.
• Why So Many Constraints? Government agencies behave as they do in large part because of the
many different goals they must pursue a nd the complex rules they must foll ow. Where does all this red
tape come from?
From us. From us, the people.
Every goal, every constraint, every bit of red tape,
was put in place by Congress, the courts, the White
House, or the agency itself responding to the
demands of some influ ential faction. Civil rights

426

Chapter 15

The "Rules"

The Bureaucracy

of Politics

"Laws" of Bureaucratic Procedure
Acheson's Rule A memorandum is written not to
inform the reader but to protect the writer.
Boren's Laws
When in doubt, mumble.
When in trouble, delegate.
When in charge, ponder.
Chapman's Rules of Committees
Never arrive on time, or you will be stamped a
beginner.
Don't say anything until the meeting is half over;
this stamps you as being wise.
Be as vague as possible; this prevents irritating
others.
When in doubt, suggest that a subcommittee be
appointed.
Meskimen's Law There's never time to do it right
but always time to do it over.

groups want every agency to hire and bu y from
women and minorities. Environmenta l groups want
every agency to file environmental impa ct statements. Industries being regulated want every new
agency policy to be formulated only after a lengthy
public hearing with lots of lawyers present. Labor
unions also want those hea rings so that they can
argue against industry lawyers. Everybody who sells
something to the government wants a "fair chance"
to make the sa le, and so everybody insists that governm ent co ntracts be awarded only after complex
procedures are followed. A lot of peopl e don't trust
the government, and so they insist that everything it
does be done in the sunshine- no secrets, no closed
meetings, no hidden files .
II' we wanted agencies to pursue their main goal
with more vigor and less encumbering red tape, we
would have to ask Congress, th e courts. or the White
House to repeal some of these co nstraints. In other
words, we would have to be willing to give up something we want in order to get something else we want
even more. But politiCS does not enco urage people to
make these trade-offs: instead it encourages us to
expect to get everything-effi ciency, fairness, help
for minorities-all at once.

Murphy's Law If anything can go wrong, it will.
O'Toole's Corollary to Murphy's Law Murphy was
an optimist.
Parkinson's First Law Work expands to fill the time
available for its completion.
Parkinson's Second Law Expenditure rises to meet
income.
Peter Principle In every hierarchy, each employee
tends to rise to his level of incompetence; thus,
every post tends to be filled by an incompetent
employee.
Robertson's Rule The more directives you issue to
solve a problem, the worse it gets.
Smith's Principle Never do anything for the first time.

iron triangle A close relationship between an
agency, a congressional committee, and an
interest group.

Agency Allies
Desp ite these co nstraints, government bureaucracies
are not powerless. In fa ct, so me of th em actively seek
certa in constra ints. They do so because it is a way of
cementing a useful relation ship with a co ngressional
co mmittee or an interest group.
At one time scholars described the relationship
between an agency, a committee, and an interest
group as an iron triangle. For exampl e, the Department of Veterans Affairs, th e House and Senate
committees on veteran s' affa irs, a nd veterans' organizations (s uch as the American Legion) wou ld form a
tight, mutually advantageous a lliance. The department would do what the committees wanted and in
return get political support a nd budget appropriations; the co mmittee members would do what the
veterans' groups wanted a nd in return get votes and
campaign contributions. Iron tri a ngles are examples
of what are ca lled client politics.
Many agencies still have important allies in Congress and the private sector, especia lly those burea us
that serve the needs of specific sectors of the economy or regions of the co untry. The Department of
Ag riculture works closely with farm organizations,

Congressiol1a lOversight
the Department of the Interior with groups interested in obtaining low-cost irrigation or grazing rights,
and the Department of Housing and Urban Development with mayors a nd real-estate developers.
Sometimes these allies are so strong that they can
defeat a popular president. For years President Reagan tried to abolish the Small Business Administration (SBA), arguing that its program of loa ns to sma ll
firms was wasteful and ridden with favoritism. But
Co ngress, reacting to pressures from small-business
groups, ra llied to the SBA's defense. As a result Reaga n had to oversee an agency tha t he didn't want.
But iron triangles are much less common today
than once was the case. Politics of late has become
fa r more complicated. For one thing, the number and
variety of interest groups have increased so much in
recent years that there is sca rcely any agency th at
is not subj ect to pressures from several competin g
interests instead of only from one powedul interest.
For another, the growth of subcommittees in Congress has mea nt that most agenci es are subject to
control by many different legislative gro ups, often
with very different co ncern s. Finally, the courts have
mad e it much easier for all kinds of indiv idua ls and
interests to intervene in agency affairs.
As a result, nowadays government agencies fa ce
a bewildering variety of co mpeting groups and legislative subcommittees that constitute not a loya l
group of allies. but a fiercely co ntentious co ll ection
of critics. The Environm ental Protection Agency is
ca ught between the demands of environmentalists
and th ose of industry organizations, the Occupational Safety and Hea lth Administration between
the press ures of labor a nd those of bu siness, a nd the
Federal Co mmunications Commission between the
desires of broadcasters and those of cable telev ision compan ies. Even the Department of Agriculture faces not a unified group of farmers, but many
different farmers sp li t into rival groups, depending
on the crops they raise, the regions in which they
live, a nd the attitudes they have toward the relative
merits of fa rm subsidi es or free markets.
Political scientist Hugh Heclo has described the
typical government agency today as bein g embedd ed
not in an iron triangle, but in an issue network. 22
These issue networks consist of people in Washington-based interest groups. on congressional staffs, in
universities a nd think tanks, and in the mass media ,
who regu larly debate government policy on a certain
subj ect-say, health care or auto sa fety. The networks are contentio us. split along political, ideologi-

427

The realfederal bureaucracy is bigger than ju st who works for the
national government. Because defense contractors depend on gover11lnent cOl/ tracts, the burea ucracy includes people who work in
these private }inns.

ca l, and economic lines. When a pres ident takes
office , he often recru its key agency officia ls [rom
those members of the issue network who are most
sympathetic to his views.
When Jimmy Carter, a Democrat. beca me pres ident, he appOinted to key posts in consumer agencies
people who were from that part of the consumer
issu e network associated with Ralph Nader. Ronald
Reaga n, a conservative Republican, filled these same
jobs with people who were from that part of the issue
network holdin g free market or antiregu lation views.
When George Bush the eld er, a more centrist Republican, took office, he fill ed these posts with more
centrist members of the issue network. Bill Clinton
brought back the co nsumer activists.

~

Congressional Oversight

The main reason why some interest groups are important to agencies is that they are important to Congress.
Not every interest group in the country has substantial access to Congress, but those that do and that are
taken seriously by the relevant committees or subcommittees must also be taken seriously by the agency.

issue network A network of people in Washington, D.C.-based interest groups, on congressional staffs, in universities and think
tanks, and in the mass media, who regularly
discuss and advocate public po li cies .

428

Chapter 15

The Bureaucracy

Furthermore, even apart from interest groups, members of Congress have constitutional powers over agencies and policy interests in how agencies function.
Congressional supervision of the bureaucracy
takes several forms. First, no agency may exist
(except for a few presidential offices and commissions) without congressional approva l. Congress
influences- and sometimes determines preciselyagency behavior by the statutes it enacts.
Second, no money may be spent unless it has first
been authorized by Congress. Authorization legislation originates in a legislative committee (such as
Agriculture, Education and Labor, or Public Works)
and states the maximum amount of money that an
agency may spend on a given program. This authorization may be permanent, it may be for a fixed number of years, or it may be annual (that is, it must be
renewed each year, or the program or agency goes
out of business).
Third , even funds that have been authorized by
Congress cannot be spent unless (in most cases) they
are also appropriated. Appropriations are usually
made annually, and they originate not with the legislative committees but with the House Appropriations Committee and its various (and influential)
subcommittees. An appropriation (money formally
set aside for a specific use) may be, and often is, for
less than the amount authorized. The Appropriations Committee's action thus tends to have a budget-cutting effect. There are some funds that can be
spent without an appropriation. but in virtua lly
every part of the bureaucracy each agency is keenly
sensitive to congress iona l concerns at the time that
the annual appropriations process is going on.

The Appropriations Committee and
Legislative Committees
The fact that an agency budget must be both authorized and appropriated means that each agency serves

authorization legislation

Legislative permission to begin or continue a government program or agency.
appropriation A legislative grant of money to
finance a government program or agency.
trust funds Funds for government programs
that are collected and spent outside the regular government budget.

not one congressional master but several. and that
these masters may be in conflict. The real power over
an agency's budget is exercised by the Appropriations Committee; the legis lative committees are especia lly important when a substantive law is first
passed or an agency is first created. or when an
agency is subject to annua l authorization.
In the past the power of the Appropriations Committee was rarely challenged: from 1947 through
1962. fully 90 percent of the House Appropriations
Committee's recommendations on expenditures
were approved by the full House without change. 23
Furthermore, the Appropriations Committee tends
to recommend less money than an agency requests
(though some specially favored agencies, such as the
FBI, the Soil Conservation Service, and the Forest
Service, have tended to get almost everything that
they have asked for). Fina lly, the process of "marking
up" (revising. amending. and approv ing) an agency 's
budget request gives to the Appropriations Committee. or one of its subcommittees. substantial influence over the po li cies that the agency follows.
Of late the appropriations committees have lost
some of their great power over government agencies.
This has happened in three ways:
First. Congress has created trust funds to pay for
the benefits many people receive. The Social Security
trust fund is the largest of these. In 1990 it took in
about $260 billion in Social Security taxes and paid
out about $220 billion in old-age benefits. There are
several other trust funds as well. Trust funds operate outside the regul ar government budget. and the
appropr iations com mi ttees have no control over
these expenditures. They are automatic.
Second. Congress has changed the authorization
of many programs from permanent or multiyear to
annua l authorizations. This means that every year
the legislative committees, as part of the reauthor ization process. get to set limits on what these agencies can spend. This lim its the abi li ty of the
appropriations committees to determine the spending limits. Before 1959 most authorizations were
permanent or multiyear. Now a long list of agencies
must be reauthorized every year-the State Department, NASA. military procurement programs of the
Defense Department. the Justice Department, the
Energy Department. and parts or all of many other
agencies.
Third. the existence of huge budget deficits during
the 1980s and early 2000s has meant that much of

Congressional Oversight
Congress's time has been taken up with trying (us ually not very successfull y) to keep spend ing down. As
a resu lt there has rarely bee n much time to discuss
the merits of va rious progra ms or how much ought
to be spent on them: instead attention has been
focused on meeting a target spending limit. In 1981
the bud get resolution passed by Congress mandated
cuts in several programs before th e appropriations
co mmittees had even co mpleted their work. 24
In add ition to the power of the purse. there are
informal ways by which Congress can co ntrol the
bureaucracy. An individual member of Congress can
call an agency head on behalf of a constituent. Most
such calls merely seek information, but some result
in, or attempt to obta in, special privUeges for particular peop le. Congressional committees may also obtain
the right to pass on certain agency decisions. This is
called committee clearance, a nd though it is usually not legally binding on the agency, few agency heads
will ignore the expressed wish of a committee ch air
that he or she be consulted before certain actions
(such as transferring fund s) are taken.

The Legislative H?to
For many decades Congress made frequent use of the
legislative veto to control bureaucratic or preSidential actions. A legislative veto is a req uirement that
a n executive decision mu st lie before Co ngress for a
specified period (usually thirty or ninety days) before
it takes effect. Congress could then veto the decision
if a resolution of disa pproval was passed by either
house (a "one-house veto ") or both houses (a "twohouse veto") . Unlike laws, such reso lutions were not
signed by the presid ent. Between 19 32 and 1980
about two hundred laws were passed providing for a
legislative veto, many of them involving presidential
proposa ls to sell arms abroad.
But in June 198 3 the Supreme Court declared the
legislative veto to be unco nstitutional. In the Chadha
case the Court held that the Constitution clearly
requires in Articl e I that "every order, reso lution, or
vote to which the concur rence of the Senate and
Ho use of Representatives may be necessary" (with
certain minor exceptions) "shall be presented to the
President of the United States," who must eith er
approve it or return it with his veto attached . In
shor t, Congress cannot take any action that has the
force of law unless the president concurs in that
action. 25 At a stroke of the pen parts of some two
hundred laws suddenly became invalid .

At least that happened in theory. In fact since the
Chadha decision Congress has passed a number of
laws that contain legisla tive vetoes, despite the
Supreme Court's having ruled against them! (Someone will have to go to court to test the constitutiona lity of these new provisions.)
Opponents of the legislative veto hope that future
Congresses will have to pass laws that state much
more clearly than before what an agency mayor may
not do. But it is just as likely that Congress will continue to pass laws stated in general terms and require that
agencies implementing those laws report their pl a ns to
Congress, so that it will have a chance to enact and
send to the president a regular bill disapproving the
proposed action. Or Congress may rely on informal
(but scarcely weak) means of persuasion, including
threats to reduce the appropriations of an agency th at
does not abide by congressional preferences.

Congressional Investigations
Perhaps the most visible and dramatic form of congressional supervision of a n agency is the investigation. Since 1792, when Cong ress investigated an
army defeat by a Native American tribe, congressional investigations of the bureaucracy have been a regular feature- sometimes constructive, sometimes
destructive- of legislative-executive relations. The
investigative power is not mentioned in the Constitution. but has been inferred from the power to legislate. The Supreme Court has consistently upheld this
interpretation, thou gh it has also said that such
investigations should not be solely for the purpose of
exposing the purely personal affairs of private individuals a nd must not operate to deprive citizens of
their basic rights.26 Congress may compel a person
to attend a n investigation by issuing a subpoena;
anyone who ignores the subpoena may be punished
for contempt. Con gress can vote to send the person to
jail or can refer the matter to a court for further
action. As explained in Chapter 14, the presid ent and
committee clearance The abil ity of a congressional committee to review and approve certain agency decisions in advance and without
passing a law.
legislative veto The authority of Congress to
block a presidential action after it has taken
place. The Supreme Court has he ld that Congress does not have this power.

429

43 0

Chapter 15

The Bureaucracy

his principal subordinates have refused to answer
certain congressional inquiries on grounds of "executive priv ilege."
Although many areas of congressional oversight- budgetary review. personnel contro ls. investigations- are designed to control the exercise of
bureaucratic discretion. other areas are intended to
ensure the freedom of certain agencies from effective
control. especially by the president. In dozens of cases
Congress has authorized department heads and
bureau chiefs to operate independent of presidential
preferences. Congress has resisted. for example. presidential efforts to ensure that policies to regulate pollution do not impose excessive costs on the economy.
and interest groups have brought suit to prevent presidential coordination of various regulatory agencies.
If the bureaucracy sometimes works at cross-purposes. it is usually because Congress-or competing
committees in Congress-wants it that way.

*

Bureaucratic "Pathologies"

Everyone complains about bureaucracy in general
(though rarely about bureaucratic agencies that
everyone believes are desirable). This chapter should
persuade you that it is difficult to say anything about
bureaucracy "in general"; there are too many different kinds of agencies. kinds of bureaucrats. and
kinds of programs to label the entire enterprise with
some single adjective. Nevertheless. many peop le
who recognize the enormous variety among government agencies still believe that they all have some
general features in common and suffer from certain
shared problems or pathologies.
This is true enough. but the reasons for it-and
the solutions. if any- are not often understood.
There are five major (or at least frequently men tioned) problems with bureaucracies: red tape. conflict. duplication. imperialism. and waste. Red tape
refers to the complex rules and procedures that must
be fo llowed to get something done. Conflict exists
because some agenc ies seem to be working at crosspurposes with other agencies. (For example. the

red tape

Complex bureaucratic rules and procedures that must be followed to get someth ing done.

Agricultura l Research Service tells farmers how to
grow crops more efficiently. while the Agricultural
Stabilization and Conservation Service pays farmers
to grow fewer crops or to produce less.) Duplication
(usually called "wasteful duplication") occurs when
two government agencies seem to be doing the same
thing. as when the Customs Service and the Drug
Enforcement Administration both attempt to intercept illegal drugs being smuggled into the country.
Imperialism refers to the tendency of agencies to
grow without regard to the benefits that their programs confer or the costs that they entail. Waste
means spending more than is necessary to buy some
product or service.
These problems all exist. but they do not necessarily exist because bureaucrats are incompetent or
power-hungry. Most exist because of the very nature
of government itself. Take red tape: partly we
encounter cumbersome rules and procedures because any large organization. governmental or not.
must have some way of ensuring that one part of
the organization does not operate out of step with
another. Business corporations have red tape also; it
is to a certain extent a consequence of bigness. But a
great amount of governmental red tape is also the
result of the need to satisfy lega l and po litical
requirements. Government agencies must hire on
the basis of "merit." must observe strict accounting
rules. must supply Congress with detailed information on their programs. and must allow for citizen
access in countless ways. Meeting each need requires
rules; enforcing the rules requires forms.
Or take conflict and duplication: they do not occur
because bureaucrats enjoy conflict or duplication.
(QUite the contrary!) They exist because Congress. in
setting up agencies and programs. often wants to
achieve a number of different. partially inconsistent
goals or finds that it cannot decide which goal it values the most. Congress has 535 members and little
strong leadership; it should not be surprising that
535 people will want different things and will sometimes succeed in getting them.
Imper ialism results in large measure from government agencies' seeking goals that are so vague and
so difficult to measure that it is hard to tell when they
have been attained. When Congress is unclear as to
exactly what an agency is supposed to do. the agency
will often convert that legislative vagueness into
bureaucratic imperialism by taking the largest possible view of its powers. It may do this on its own; more
often it does so because interest groups and judges

Bureaucratic "Pathologies"
rush in to fill the vacuum left by Congress. As we
saw in Chapter 3, the 19 73 Rehabilitation Act was
passed with a provision barring di scri mination
aga in st peop le with di sa bilities in any program
receivin g federa l aid . Und er pressure fro m peopl e
with di sabilities, that lofty but vague goa l was converted by the Department of Transportation into a
requirement that virtually every big-city bus have a
device installed to lift peo pl e in wheelchairs on
board.
Waste is probably the biggest criticism that people
have of the bureaucracy. Everybody has heard stories
of the Pentagon's paying $9 1 for screws that cost 3
cents in the hardware store. President Reagan's "Private Sector Survey on Cost Control," generally
known as the Grace Commission (after its chairman,
J. Peter Grace), publicized these and other tales in a
1984 report.
No doubt there is waste in government. After all ,
unlike a business firm worried about maximizing
profits, in a government agency there are only weak
incentives to keep costs down . If a busin ess employee
cuts costs, he or she orten receives a bonus or raise,
and the fi rm gets to add the savings to its profits. If a
government offici al cuts costs, he or she receives no
reward, and the agency ca nnot keep the savingsthey go back to the Treasury.
But many of the horror stories are either exaggerations or unusual occurrences. 2 7 Most of the screws,
hammers, and light bulbs purchased by the government are obtained at low cost by means of competitive bidding among several suppli ers. When the
government does pay outlandish amounts, the reason
typically is that it is purchasing a new or one-of-akind item not available at your neighborhood hardware store-for example, a new bomber or missile.
Even when the government is not overcharged, it
still may spend more money than a private firm in
buying what it need s. The reason is red tape- the
rules and procedures designed to ensure that when
the government bu ys something, it wi ll do so in a
way that serves the interests of many groups. For
example, it must often buy from American rather
than foreign suppliers, even if the latter charge a
lower price; it must make use of contractors that
employ minoriti es; it mu st hire only union laborers
and pay them the "preva ilin g" (that is, the highest)
wage; it mu st allow public inspection of its records; it
frequently is required to choose contractors favored
by influenti al members of Congress; and so on. Pri-

431

These long lines of cars at the border between the United States
and Mexico may be a symbol of "bureaucratic red tape" to
some travelers, but they are a sign of "effective law enforcement"
to people who want to cut off the flow of drugs and illegal
immigrants.

vate firms do not have to comply with all these rules
and thus can buy for less.
From this discussion it should be easy to see why
these five basic bureaucratic problems are so hard to
correct. To end conflicts and duplication Congress
wou ld have to make some po licy choices and set
some clear priorities, but with all the competing
demands that it faces , Co ngress find s it difficult to do
th,at. You make more friends by helping people than
by hurting them, and so Congress is more inclined to
add new progra ms than to cut old on es, whether or
not the new programs are in conflict with existing
ones. To check imperialism some way would have to
be found to measure the benefits of government. but
t~at is often impossible; government exists in part to
a~hieve precisely those goals-such as national
defense-that are least measurable. Furthermore,
what might be done to remedy some problems would
make other problems worse: if you simplify rul es and
procedures to cut red tape, you are also likely to
reduce the coordination among agencies and thus to
increase the extent to which there is dupli cation or
conflict. If you wa nt to reduce waste, you wi ll have to
have more rules and inspectors- in short, more red
tape. The problem of bureaucracy is insepa rable
from the problem of government genera lly.
Just as people are likely to say that they dislike
Congress but like their own member of Congress,

432

Chapter 15

The Bureaucracy
the bureaucra cy, any given agency tends to have
many friend s.

Red Tape

Refofllling the Bureaucracy

As early as the seventh century, legal and government documents in England were bound together
with a tape of pinkish red color. In the 1850s historian Thomas Carlyle described a British politician
as "little other than a red tape Talking Machine,"
and later the American writer Washington Irving
said of an American figure that "his brain was little
better than red tape and parchment."
Since then red tape has come to mean "bureaucratic delay or confusion," especially that accompanied by unnecessary paperwork.
Source: From Safire's Political Dictionary by William Safire. Copyright © 1968, 1972, 1978 by William Safire. Reprinted by permis-

sion of Random House, Inc. and the author.

they are inclined to express hostility toward "the
bureaucracy" but goodwill for that part of the
bureaucracy with which they have dealt personally.
In 1973 a survey of Americans found that over half
had had some contact with one or more kinds of government agencies. most of which were either run
directly or funded indirectly by the federal government. The great majority of people were satisfied
with these contacts and felt that they had been treated fairly and given useful assistance. When these
peopl e were asked their feelings about government
officials in genera l, however, they expressed much
less favorable attitudes . Whereas about 80 percent
liked the officials with whom they had dealt. only 42
percent liked officials in general. 28 This finding helps
expla in why government agencies are rarely reduced
in size or bud get: whatever the popular feelings about

The history of American bureaucracy has been punctuated with countless efforts to mal e it work better and
cost less. There were eleven major attempts in the twentieth century alone. The latest was the ational Performance Review (NPR)- popularly called the plan to
"reinvent government"-Ied by Vice President Al Gore.
The PR differed from many of the preceding
reform efforts in one important way. Most of the earlier ones suggested ways of increasing central (that is,
presidential) control of government agencies: the
Brownlow Commission (1936-1937) recommended
giving the president more assistants, the First Hoover
Commission (1947- 1949) suggested ways of improving to p-l evel management. a nd the Ash Counci l
(1969- 1971 ) called for consolid ating existing agencies into a few big "super departments. " The intent
was to make it easier for the president and his cabinet
secretaries to run the bureaucra cy. The key ideas were
effici ency, accountability, a nd consistent policies.
Th e NPR, by contrast, emphasized customer satisfaction (the "customers" in thi s case being the citizens
who come into contact with federal agencies). To the
authors o[ the NPR report, the main problem with the
bureaucracy was that it had become too centralized,
too rule-bound, too little concerned with making programs work. a nd too much concerned with avoiding
scandal. The NPR report contain ed many horror stories about useless red tape, excessive regulations, and
cumbersome procurement systems that make it next
to impossible for agencies to do what they were created to do. (For example, before it could buy an ashtray,
the General Services Administration issued a ninepage document that described an ashtray and specifled
how many pieces it must break into, should it be hit
with a hammer.)29 To solve these problems the NPR
ca lled [or less centralized management and more
employee initiative, fewer deta iled rules and more
emphasis on customer satisfa ction . It sought to create
a new kind of organizational culture in government
agencies, one more like that found in the more innovative, quality-conscious American corporations. The
NPR was reinforced legislatively by the Government
Performance a nd Results Act (GPRA) of 1993, which
required agencies "to set goals, measure performance,
and report on the results."

Summary

Most bureaucrats are people we like. such as the letter carriers il1 the Postal Service.

But making these changes is easier sa id than
done. Most of the rules and red tape that make it
hard for agency heads to do a good job are the result
eith er of the struggle between the White House and
Congress for control over the agencies or of the agencies' desire to avoid irritating influential voters. Silly
as the rules for ashtrays may sound . they were written so that the government co uld say it had an
"objective" sta ndard for buying ashtrays. If it simply
went out and bought ashtrays at a department store
the way ordinary peopl e do. it would risk being
accused by the Acme Ashtray Company of buying
trays from its competitor. the A-I Ashtray Company.
because of political favoritism.
The rivalry between the president and Congress for
control of the bureaucracy makes bureaucrats nervous

*
B

about irritating either branch. and so they issue rules
designed to avoid getting into trouble. even if these
rules make it hard to do their job. Matters become even
worse during periods of divided government when different parties control the White House and Congress.
As we saw in Chapter 14. divided government may not
have much effect on making policy. but it can have a big
effect on implementing it. Presidents of one party have
tried to increase political control over the bureaucracy
("executive micromanagement"). and Congresses of
another party have responded by increasing the number of investigations and detailed rule-malting ("legislative micromanagement") . Divided government
intensifies the cross-fIre between the executive and legislative branches. making bureaucrats dig into even
deeper layers of red tape to avoid getting hurt.
This does not mean that reform is impossible. only
that it is very difficult. For example. despite a lack of
clear-cut successes in other areas. the NPR's procurement reforms stuck: government agencies can
now buy things costing as much as $100.000 without following any complex regulations.
It might be easier to make desirable changes if the
bureaucracy were accountable to only one mastersay. the president- instead of to several. But that
situation. which exists in many parliamentary democracies. creates its own problems. When the bureaucracy has but one master. it often ends up having
none: it becomes so powerful that it contro ls the
prime minister and no lon ger listens to citizen complaints. A weak. divid ed bureaucracy. such as exists
in the United States. may strike us as inefficient. but
that very ineffi Ciency may help protect our liberties.

SUMMARY

ureaucracy is characteristic of almost all aspects
of modern life. not simply the government. Government bureaucracies. however. pose special problems because they are subj ect to competing sources of
political authority. must function in a constitutional
system of divided powers and federalism. have vague
goals. and lack incentive systems that will encourage
efficiency. The power of a bureaucracy should be
measured by its discretionary a uthority. not by the
number of its employees or the size of its budget.

War and depression have been the principal sources
of bureaucratic growth. aided by important changes in
constitutional interpretation in the 19 30s that permitted Congress to delegate broad grants of authority to
administrative agencies. With only partial success Congress seeks to check or recover those grants by controlling budgets. personnel. and policy decisions and by the
exercise of legislative vetoes. The uses to which bureaucrats put their authority can be explained in part by
their recruitment and security (they have an agency

433

New Administration
Struggling to Fill Top Posts
"T;abinet Secretaries Say
e President Needs Help!"

MEMORANDUM
To: Dr. Robert Smith, president of
Cybersystems Engin eering
From: James Logan, secretary of defense
Subject: Becoming an assistant secretary
of defense

May 20
WAS HI NGTON
Four months into th
d d
e new ad ..
re S of assistant sec t
ministration hWlret
re ary and dep t
. '
ary positions remain fll
u Yassistant secnum ber of presidential P~I~ti~a~d. In .1960 the total
450. Today the total is Over
appO/IJ tees was just
2
IS not the whole story. Rath ,400, but sheer growth
era l bureaucracy pi
er~ say experts on fedun filled because (h ublll public service posts g
.
e)o s have b
0
IIlg, even punishing . . .
eCOme so unreward_

As both secretary and a dear old
coll ege buddy of yours, I write again
to express my hope that you will accept
the president's call to service. We all desperately want you aboard. Yes,
conflict-of-interest laws will require you to sell your stock in your present company and
drop out of its generous pension plan . No, the government won't even pay moving
costs. And once you leave office, you will be barred for life from lobbying the executive
branch on matters in which you were directly involved whil e in office, and you will be
barred for two years from lobbying on matters that were under your general official
authority. Your other concerns have teeth, too, but let me help you weigh your options.
Arguments for:
1. I hate to prea ch, but it is one's duty to serve one's country when called . Your sacrifice
would honor your f amily and benefit your fellow Ameri cans for years to come.
2. As an accompl ished professional and the head of a company that has done business
with the government, you could help the president succeed in reforming the
department so t hat it works better and costs less.
3. Despite the restrictions, you co uld resume your career once your public service was
complete.
Arguments against:
1. Since you w ill have to be confirmed by the Senate, your life wi ll be put under a
microscope, and everything (even some of ou r old college mischief together) will be
fair game for congressional staffers and reporters.
2. You will face hundreds of rul es telling you what you can't do and scores of
congressmen tell ing you what you should do. Old friends w ill get mad at you for
not doing them favors. The president will demand loyalty. The press will pounce on
your every mistake, real or imagined .
3. Given the federal limits on whom in the government you can deal with after you
leave office, your job at Cybersystems may well suffer.
Your decision:
Accept position ____ Reject pos it ion _ __

Summary
orientation). their personal political views, and the
nature of the tasks that their agencies are performing.
Many of the popular solutions for the problems of
bureaucratic rule- red tape. duplication. conflict.
agency imperialism. and waste- fail to take into

account that these problems are to a degree inherent
in any government that serves competing goals and
is superv ised by rival elected ofllcials. Nevertheless,
some reform efforts have succeeded in making government work better and cost less to operate.

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?

1. What happened to mal<e bureaucracy a "fourth
branch" of American national government?
The Constituti on made no provision for an administrative system other than to allow the president to
appo int. with the advice a nd consent of the Senate.
ambassadors , Supreme Court judges, and "all other
officers .. . which sha ll be provided by law. " By the
early twentieth century, however. Washington 's rol e
in making. administering, and funding public policies had already grown far beyond what the Framers
had contemplated . Two world wars. the New Dea l.
and the Great Society each left th e government with
expanded powers and requiring new batteries of
administrative agencies to exercise them. Today. the
federal bureaucracy is as vast as most people's expectations about Washington's responsibility for every
public concern one can name. It is the appointed officials- the bureaucrats-not the elected officials or
policymakers . who command the troops , deliver the
mail. audit the tax returns, run the fed era l prisons .
decide who qualifies for public assistance. and do
co untless other tasks. Unavo id ab ly. many bureaucrats exercise discretion in deciding what public laws
a nd regulation s mean and how to apply them. Still .

the president. ca binet secretaries. and thou sands of
political appointees are ultimately their bosses. Congress and the courts have ample. if imperfect. means
of ch ecking and balancing even the biggest bureaucracy. old or n ew.
2. What are the actual size and scope of tile federal
bureaucracy?
A few million civil servants work directly for the federal government. but over five times as many people
work indirectly for Washington as employees of bUsiness firms or of nonprofit organizations that receive
federal grants or contracts. or as state and local government employees working under federal mandates.
For example. the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS) has about 65.000 employees.
runs over 300 different programs. and makes over
60.000 grants a year. But millions more people work
indirectly for the HHS- as state and local government
employees whose entire jobs involve the administration of one or more HHS programs (for example, Medicaid), and as people who work for community-serving
nonprofit organizations that receive HHS grants to
administer social services.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. What should {Je done to improve bureaucratic
performance?
There have been numerous dforts to make the
bureaucracy work better and cost less, including
eleven presid ential or other major commissions in
the twentieth century. The latest was the National
Performance Review (NPR), popularly ca lled the
plan to "reinvent government." Vice President Gore
led the PR during the two terms of the Clinton
administration. The PR was predicated on the view
that bureaucracy had become too centra lized. too

rule-bound . too little concerned with program
results, and too much co ncerned with avoiding scandal. In the end , the PR produced certain moneysav ing changes in the federal procurement process
(how government purchases goods and serv ices from
private contractors). and it also streamlined parts of
the federal personnel process (how Washington hires
ca reer employees) . Most experts. however. gave the
NPR mixed grades and co ncluded that it had fallen
far short of its ambitious goals of improving government performance.

435

436

Chapter 15

The Bureaucracy

2. Is "red tape" all bad?
0, not all. Red tape refers to the complex rules and
procedures that must be followed to get something
done. All large organizations. including business
firms, have some red tape. Some red tape in govern ment agencies is si lly and wasteful (or worse) , but try
imaginin g government without any red tape at all.

Imagine no rules about hiring on the basis of merit,
no strict fin ancial accounting procedures, and no
regulations concerning citizen access to information
or public record keeping. As the Yale politica l scientist Herbert Kaufman once quipped , one citizen 's
"red tape" is often another's "treasured procedural
sa feguard ."

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

For addresses a nd reports of various cabinet
departments
Web addresses: www.whitehouse.gov/
Documents and bulletin boards:
www.fedworld.gov
National Performance Review: www.npr.gov

A few specific web sites of federal agencies
Department of Defense: www.defenselinkmil
Department of Education: www.ed.gov
Department of Health and Human Services:
www.dhhs.gov
Department of State: www.state.gov
Federa l Bureau of Investigation: www.fbi.gov
Department of Labor: www.dol.gov

SUGGESTED READINGS
Burke. John E Bureaucratic RespollsiiJility . Baltimo re: Jobn s Hopkin s University Press. 1986. Exam ines th e problem of indiv id ual res po nsibility- fo r examp le. wh en to be a wh istl e
blower- in governme nt agencies.
Dilu lio. John J.. Gera ld Garvey. an d Dona ld P. KettI. IlIlp rovillg Oovel'llllle/lt Peljomwllce: All OWller's Manllal. Washington. D. C.:
Brookin gs Institution. 19 9 3. A concise overvi ew of th e history of federa l bureauc racy and ideas about how to reform it.
Dow ns. Anthony. In side Bureaucracy. Boston : Li ttle. Brown. 196 7.
An econ omist's expla nati on of why bureaucra ts and bureau s
behave as th ey do.
Halperin. Morton H. Bllreallcratie Politics alld Foreigll Policy. Washington. D.C. : Broo kin gs Institution. 1974 . In sightful accou nt
of tbe strategies by whic h diplom atic a nd milita ry bureau cracies defend their interests.
Heclo. Hu gb. A OOVel'lllllellt oj Strallgers. Wa shin gton. D. C.: Brookings Institution. 19 77 . Ana lyzes how po li ti ca l apPOin tees
attempt to gain control of the Was hington bureau cracy and
how burea ucrats resist those efrorts.

Jo hn son. Rona ld L.. and Gary Libecap. Til e Federal Civil Service Sy stelll and tile Problell1 oj Bllreaucracy. Cbi cago: Un iversity or
Chicago Press. 199 4 . Two eco nomists ana lyze how federal
bureau crats acquire position s and sa la ries.
Light. Paul C. Tile True Size oJ Governmell t. Was hin gton . D.C. :
Brookings In stitution . ] 99 9 . A revealing explan ation of why
the federa l governme nt is a lot bigger than is suggested by simply co untin g employees.
Moore. Mark H. Creatillg Pulllic Valli e: Strategic Managelllent ill Govemlllellt. Cambridge: Harvard Unive rsity Press. 1995. A
thoughtful account of how wi se burea ucrats can make governm ent work better.
Parkinson . C. Nort hcote. Parkillsoll's Law . Boston: Hou gbton Mifflin. 195 7. H a lf~seri ou s. ha lf- joking expl a natio n of why gov ernm ent age ncies tend to grow.
Wil so n. Jam es Q. Bureal/cracy: WlJat Gover/llnellt Agencies Do alld
W/zy TiJey Do It. New York: Basic Books. 1989. A comprehensive rev iew a l' what we kn ow about bureau cratic behav ior in
th e United Slates.

CHAPTER

16

The Judiciary

The Development of the Federal Courts
National Supremacy and Slavery •
Government and the Economy •
Government and Political Liberty •
The Revival of State Sovereignty

The Structure of the Federal Courts
Selecting Judges

The Jurisdiction of the Federal Courts
Getting to Court
Fee Shifting • Standing •
Class-Action Suits

The Supreme Court in Action
The Power of the Federal Courts
The Power to Make Policy . Views of
Judicial Activism • Legislation and the
Courts

Checks on Judicial Power
Congress and the Courts •
Opinion and the Courts

Public

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

Why should federal judges serve for
life?

H

Why should federal courts be able to
declare laws unconstitutional?
2. Should federal judges only interpret
existing laws or should they be able
to create new laws?

ard ly any American cares what people are picked to be federa l district
court judges. Can you name even one district court judge in your
city? But Congress cares deeply about who is appointed to be federal judges,
especia lly to the Supreme Court. The reason for congressional concern is
that federal courts, even at the lowest level, make important decisions that
a ffect all of us.
And as the power of the federal government has grown, so the power of
federa l courts has increased. At one time there was no federal policy about
the environment, welfare, abortion, gun control, or civi l rights; now there
are policies on all of these matters. and so there are more and more court
ruli ngs that tell us what these policies mean.
When in 1991 President George H. W. Bush nominated Clarence
Thomas to the Supreme Court, he was barely confirmed by a Senate vote
that was the closest in over a century. When in 1987 Ronald Reagan nominated Robert Bork to a justice, he was not confirmed by the Senate. And
when in 2003 George W. Bush nominated peop le to lower federa l courts,
some were blocked by a Democratic party filibuster.
Only in the United States wou ld the selection of a judge produce so dramatic and bitter a conflict. The reason is simple: only in the United States do
judges play so large a role in making public policy.
One aspect of this power is judicia l r evie w- the right of the federa l
courts to declare laws of Congress and acts of the executive branch void and
unenforceable if they are judged to be in con Oiet with the Constitution.
Since 1789 the Supreme Court has declared over one hundred sixty federa l
laws to be unconstitutional. In Britain, by contrast, Parliament is supreme,
and no court may strike down a law th at it passes. As the second earl of
Pembroke is supposed to have said, "A parliament can do anything but make
a man a woman and a woman a man." All that prevents Parliament from
acting contrary to the (unwritten) constitution of Britain are the consciences of its members and the opinions of the citizens. About Sixty
nations do have something resembling judicial review, but in on ly a few
cases does this power mean much in practice. Where it means somethingin Australia. Canada, Germany, India, and some other nations-one finds a
stable. federal system of government with a strong tradition of an independent judiciary.] (Some other nations- France, [or example- have special council s, rather than courts, that can under certa in circumstances
decide that a law is not authorized by the constitution.)

438

The Developm ent of the Fe deral Courts
Judi cial review is the federal co urts' chief weapon
in the system of checks and bala nces on which the
America n government is based. Today few people
wo uld deny to the co urts the righ t to decide that a
leg islative or executive act is unco nstitutiona l,
though once that ri ght wa s controversial. What
remains controversial is the method by which such
review is conducted.
There are two competin g views. each ardently
pressed during th e fi ght to co nfirm Claren ce
Thomas. The first holds that judges should only
judge- that is, they should confine themselves to
applying those rules that are stated in or clearly
implied by th e lan gu age of the Constitution. This is
often ca lled the strict-constru ctionist approach.
The other argues that judges should discover the
general principles underlying the Constitution and
its often vague langu age, amplify those principles on
the basis of some moral or economic philosophy, and
apply them to cases. This is sometimes called the
activist a pproach.
ote th at the difference between activist a nd
stri ct-constructionist judges is not necessarily the
same as the difference between liberals and conservatives. Jud ges can be politica l libera ls and sti ll
beli eve that they are bound by the la ngu age of the
Co nstitution. A liberal justice, Hugo Black. once
voted to uphold a state law ba nning birth control
beca use nothing in the Constitution prohibited such
a law. Or judges can be conservative a nd sti ll think
that they have a duty to use their best judgment in
decidin g what is good public policy. Rufus Peckham.
one such conservative. voted to overturn a state law
setting maximum hours of work because he believed
that the Fourteenth Amendment guara nteed something ca lled "freedom of contract," even thou gh
th ose words are not in the amendment.
Seventy years ago judicial activists tended to be
conservatives and strict-constructionist judges tended to be liberals; today the opposite is usually the case.

Chief Justice

Appointed By

Years of Service

John Jay
Ol iver Ellsworth
John M arshall
Roge r B. Tan ey
Salmon P. Ch ase
M o rri son R. Wait e
M elvi lle W. Full er
Ed wa rd D. W hit e
W ill iam Howard Taft
Ch arles Evans Hughes
Harl an Fiske Sto ne
Fred M . Vinson
Earl Warren
Warre n E. Bu rger
William H. Rehnquist

Washingto n
Washington
Adams
Jackson
Lin co ln
Grant
Cl eveland
Taft
Ha rdi ng
Hoover
F. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhow er
Nixon
Rea gan

1789-1 795
1796-1800
1801 - 1835
1836-1864
1864-1873
1874-1888
1888- 1910
1910- 1921
1921 - 1930
1930- 1941
1941 - 1946
1946- 1953
1953-1969
1969- 1986
1986-present

Note: Omitted is John Rutledge, who served for only a few months in

1795 and who was not confirmed by the Senate.

so large a role in making public policy. The traditional v iew of civil courts wa s that they judged disputes
between people who had direct dealings with each
other- they had entered into a contract, for example. or one had dropped a load of bricks on the other's
toe- a nd decid ed which of the two par ties was right.
The co urt then supplied relief to the wronged party,
usua lly by requiring the other person to pay him or
her money ("da mages").
This traditional understandin g was based on the
belief that jud ges would find and apply existing law.
The purpose of a court case was not to learn what the
judge believes but what the law requi.res. The later rise
of judicial activism occurred when judges questioned
this traditional view and argued instead that judges
do not merely find the law. they make the law.
The view that judges interpret the law and do not
make policy made it easy for the Founders to justify

judicial revie w

The power of courts to
declare laws unconstitutiona l.

The Development of the
Federal Courts
Most of the Founders pro bably expected the Supreme
Court to have the power of judicial review (though
they did not say that in so ma ny words in the Constituti on). but they did not expect federal courts to play

439

strict-constructionist appr oach

The view
th at judg es should decide cases stri ctly on
the basis of the language of t he laws and the
Co nstitution

a ctivist a pproach

The view that judges should
discern th e general principles underlying laws
o r the Constitution and appl y th em to modern
ci rcumstan ces.

440

Chapter 16

The Judiciary

Marbury v. Madison
The story of Marbury v. Madison is often told, but it
dese rves another telling beca use it illustrates so
many features of the role of the Supreme Courthow apparently small cases can have large results,
how the power of the Court depends not simply on
its constitutional authority but also on its acting in
ways that avoid a clear confrontation with other
branches of government, and how the climate of
opinion affects how the Court goes about its task.
When President John Adams lost his bid for
reelection to Thomas Jefferson in 1800, he- and
all members of his party, the Federalists- feared
that Jefferson and the Republicans would weaken
the federal government and turn its powers to what
the Federalists believed were wrong ends (states'
rights, an alliance with the French, hostility to business). Feverishly, as his hours in office came to an
end , Adams worked to pack the judiciary with fiftynine loyal Federalists by giving them so-called midnight appointments before Jefferson took office.
John Marshall , as Ada ms's secretary of state,
had the task of certifying and delivering these new
judicial commissions. In the press of business he
delivered all but seventeen; these he left on his desk
for the incoming secretary of state, James Madi-

the power of judicial review and led them to predict
that the courts would playa relatively neutral , even
passive, role in public affairs. Alexander Hamilton,
writing in Federalist o. 78 , described the judiciary as
the branch "least dangerous" to political rights. The
president is commander in chi ef and thus holds the
"sword of the community "; Congress appropriates
money and thus "commands the purse" as well as
decides what laws shall govern. But the judiciary "has
no inlluence over either the sword or the purse" and
"can take no active reso lution whatever. " It has "neither force nor will but merely judgment," and thus is
"beyond comparison the weakest of the three departments of power. " As a result "liberty can have nothing to fear from the judiciary alone. " Hamilton went
on to state clearly that the Constitution intended to
give to the courts the right to decide whether a law is
contrary to the Constitution. But this authority, he

so n, to send out. Jefferson and Madison, however,
were furiou s at Adams's behavior and refused to
deliver the seventeen. William Marbury and three
other Federalists who had been promised these
commissions hired a lawyer and brought suit
against Madison to force him to produce the documents. The suit requested the Supreme Court to
iss ue a writ of mandamus (from the Latin, "we
command") ordering Madison to do his duty. The
right to issue such writs had been given to the
Co urt by the Judiciary Act of 1789.
Marshall, the man who had faUed to deliver the
commissions to Marbury and his friends in the first
place, had become the chief justice and was now in
a position to decide the case. These days a justice
who had been involved in an issue before it came to
the Court would probably disqualify himself or herself, but Marshall had no intention of letting others
decide this question. He fa ced, however, not simply a
partisan dispute over jobs but what was nearly a
constitutional crisis. If he ordered the comrnission
delivered, Madison might still refuse, and the Court
had no way- if Mad ison was determined to resistto compel him. The Court had no police force,
whereas Madison had the support of the president of

explained. was designed not to enlarge the power of
the courts but to confine that of the legislature.
Obviously things have changed since Hamilton 's
time. The evolution of the federal courts, especially
the Supreme Court, toward the present level of
activ ism and influence has been shaped by the political, economic, and ideologica l forces of three historical eras. From 178 7 to 1865 nation building, the
leg itimacy of the federa l government, and slavery
were the great issues: from 1865 to 1937 the great
issue was the relationship between the government
and th e economy: from 19 38 to th e present the
major issues confronting the Court have involved
personal liberty and social equa lity and the potential
confli ct between the two. In the first period the Court
asserted the supremacy of the fed era l government; in
the second it placed im portant restri ctio ns on the
powers of that government: and in the third it

Tile Development of tile Federal Courts

the United States. And if the order were given,
whether or not Madison complied, the Jeffersonian
Republicans in Congress would probably try to
impeach Marshall. On the other hand, if Marsha ll
allowed Madison to do as he wished, the power of
the Supreme Court would be seriously reduced.
Marshall's solution was ingenious. Speaking for
a unanimous Court, he announced that Madison
was wrong to withhold the commissions, that
courts could issue writs to compel public officials
to do their prescribed duty- but that the Supreme
Court had no power to issue such writs in this case
because the law (the Judiciary Act of 1789) giving
it that power was unconstitutional. The law said
that the Supreme Court could issue such writs as
part of its "original jurisdiction"-that is, persons
seeking such writs could go directly to the Supreme
Court with their request (rather than go flrst to a
lower federal court and then, if dissatisfied, appeal
to the Supreme Court). Article III of the Constitution, Marshall pointed out, spelled out precisely the
Supreme Court's original jurisdiction; it did not
mention issuing writs of this sort and plainly indicated that on all matters not mentioned in the
Constitution, the Court would have only appell ate

enlarged the scope of personal freedom and narrowed that of economic freedom.

National Supremacy and Slavery
"Prom 1789 until the Civil War, the dominant interest of the Supreme Court was in that greatest of all
the questions left unresolved by the Founders-the
nation-state relationship. "2 The answer that the
Court gave, under the leadership of Chief Justice John
Marshall, was that national law was in all instances
the dominant law, with state law having to give way,
and that the Supreme Court had the power to decide
what the Constitution meant. In two cases of enormous importance-Marbury v. Madison in 1803 and
McCulloch v. Maryland in 1819-the Court. in decisions written by Marshall, held that the Supreme
Court could declare an act of Congress unconstitutional; that the power granted by the Constitution to
the federa l government flows from the people and

John Adallls

James Madison

jurisdiction. Congress may not change what the
Constitution says; hence the part of the Judiciary
Act attempting to do this was null and void.
The result was that a showdown with the Jeffersonians was avoided-Madison was not ordered to
deliver the commissions-but the power of the
Supreme Court was unmistakably clarified and
enlarged. As Marshall wrote, "It is emphatically
the province and duty of the judicial department
to say what the law is." Furthermore, "a law
repugnant to the Constitution is void."

thus should be generously construed (and thus any
federal laws that are "necessary and proper" to the
attainment of co nstitutional ends are permissible);
and that federal law is supreme over state law, even to
the point that a state may not tax an enterprise (such
as a bank) created by the federa l government. 3
The supremacy of the federal government was
reaffirmed by other decisions as wel l. In 1816 the
Supreme Court rejected the claim of the Virginia
courts that the Supreme Court cou ld not review the
decisions of state courts. The Virgin ia courts were
ready to acknowledge the supremacy of the U.S. Constitution but believed that they had as much right as
the U.S. Supreme Court to decide what the Constitution meant. The Supreme Court felt otherwise, and in
this case and another like it the Court asserted its
own broad powers to review any state court decision
if that decision seemed to violate fed eral law or the
federal Constitution. 4

441

442

Chapter 16

The Judiciary

WILL DI: HI:LD ON

THURSDAYHVHNING, 20 INSTANT,

~.t T~ o'e10c~(, In ISIt ,\ ":1. C Ilt:IU': II. tu cou... idt' I' tlu· nlrocious dcc blon of the
Supreme Oourt In 11u-

DRt~D ~tOTT tlt~E,

Bod other ()u I ~lI~es ,10 "hida tlu.' col.lr~d I'Co).l e lIrt' ""bj.cci unt!cr the Con~"tulion of .he Ulu lcd S'lIh!,.:,
"

C. L. RIIMOND,
-"
ROBIIRT PURVIS,

.~ .tllerJJ ~Vlll be ,\ri llC;lkcrs on HIe ~casion.

Hr•. iU OTT, J1l r. ltI'IlIM. . . .

D. 8. J'ONES of Ohio, have I\I~ t\(CCIHCd iDvltaHous to be present.
AJI persons are Invited to nlhmtl. Admhtnu~e free.

Roger B. Taney. chief justice ji"om 1836 to 1864. wrote tlIe Dred Scott decision. which asserted
that blacks were not citizens of the United States. Dred Scott claimed that when his master
brought him north to a free state. he ceased to be a slave. The public outcry against the decision
was intense. at least in the Nortii. as is evidentji"olll tlIis poster announcing a mass meeting "lo
consider the atrocious decision. "

The power of th e federal government to regu late
commerce among the states was also established.
When New York gave to Robert Fulton. the inventor
of the steamboat. the monopoly right to operate hi s
steamboats on the ri vers of that state. the Marsha ll
Court overturned the license because the rivers connected ew York and New Jersey and thus trade on
those rivers would involve in terstate commerce, and
federal law in that area was supreme. Since there was
a conflicting federa l law on the books. the state law
was vo id . s
All of th is may sound rather obvious to us today,
when the supremacy of the federal government is
largely unquestioned. In the early nineteenth century. however. these were almost revolutionary decisions. The Jeffersonia n Republicans were in power
and had beco me increasingly devoted to states'
rights; they were ag hast at the Marshall decisions.
President Andrew Jackson attacked the Court bitterly for defending the right of the federa l government
to create a national bank and for siding with the
Cherokee Indians in a dispute with Georgia. In speaking of the latter case, Jackson is supposed to have
remarked, "John Marsha ll has made hi s decision;
now let him enforce it! "6
Though Marsha II seemed to have secured the
supremacy of the federal governme nt over the state

governments. another even more divisive issue had
arisen; that, of course, was slavery. Roger B. Taney
succeeded Marshall as chief justice in 1836. He was
deliberately chosen by President Jackson beca use he
was an advocate of states' rights. and he began to
chip away at federal supremacy. upho ldi ng state
claims that Marshall would have set aside. But the
decision for which he is famous- or infamousca me in 1857. when in the Ored Scott case he wrote
perhaps the most disastro us judicial op inion ever
issued. A slave, Dred Scott. had been ta ken by his
owner to a territory (near what is now st. Paul, Minnesota) where slavery was ill ega l under federal law.
Scott claimed that since he h ad resided in a free territory, he was now a free man. Taney held that Negroes
were not citizens of the United States and could not
become so, and that the federal law- the Missour i
Compromise-prohibiting slavery in northern territor ies was unconstitutional. 7 The public outcry
against this view was enormous, a nd the Court a nd
Ta ney were discredited in the North , at least. The
Civi l War was ultimately fought over what the Co urt
mistakenly had assumed was a purely lega l question.

Government and the Economy
The supremacy of the federal government may have
been established by John Marsha ll and the Civil War.

The Development of the Federal Courts
but the scope of the powers of that government or even
of the state governments was still to be defined. During
the period [rom the end of the Civil War to the early
years of the ew Deal, the dominant issue the Supreme
Court faced was decidin g when the economy would be
regulated by the states and when by the nation.
The Court revealed a strong though not inflexibl e
attachment to private property. In fact that attachment had always been there: the Founders thought
that political and property rights were inextricably
linked, and Marshall certa inly supported the sanctity
of contracts. But now, with the mutin g of the federal
supremacy issue and the rise of a national economy
with important unanticipated effects, the property
question became the dominant one. In genera!, the
Court developed the view that the Fourteenth
Amendment, adopted in 1868 primarily to protect
African American claims to citizenship from hostile
state action, also protected private property and the
corporation from unreasonable state action. The crucia l phrase was this: no state sha ll "deprive any person of life, liberty, or property. without due process of
law. " Once it became clear that a "person" could be a
firm or a corporation as well as an individual, business a nd industry began to fl ood the courts with cases
challeng ing various government regulations.
The Court quickly found itself in a thicket: it began
ruling on the constitutionality of virtually every
effort by any government to regulate any aspect of
business or labor, and its workload rose sharply. Judicial activism was born in the 1880s and 1890s as the
Court set itself up as the arbiter of what kind of regulation was permissible. In the first seventy-five years
of this country's history, only 2 federa l laws were held
to be unconstitutional; in the next seventy-five years,
71 were. 8 Of the roughly 1,300 state laws held to be
in conflict with the federal Constitution since 1789,
about 1,200 were overturned after 1870. In one
decade alone-the 1880s-5 federal and 48 state
laws were declared unconstitutional.
Many of these decisions provided clear evidence of
the Co urt's desire to protect private property: it
upheld the use of injunctions to prevent labor
str ikes, 9 struck down the federal income tax,1 0
sharply limited the reach of the antitrust law, 11
restricted the powers of the Interstate Commerce
Commi ss ion to set railroad rates,1 2 prohibited the
federal government from eliminating child labor,1 3
and prevented the states from setting maximum
hours of work. 14 In 184 cases between 1899 and

1937, the Supreme Court struck down state laws for
violating the Fourteenth Amendment, usuaJJy by
economic regulation .15
But the Court also rendered decisions that authorized various kinds of regulation. It all owed states to
regulate businesses "affected with a public interest," I h
changed its mind about the Interstate Commerce
Commission and all owed it to regulate railroad
rates,I 7 upheld rules requiring railroads to improve
their sa fety,1 8 approved state antiliqu or laws,1 9
approved state mine safety laws,2o supported state
workers' compensation laws,2l allowed states to regulate [tre-insurance rates,22 and in time upheld a number of state laws regulating wages and hours. Indeed,
between 1887 and 1910, in 558 cases involving the
Fourteenth Amendment, the Supreme Court upheld
state regulations over 80 percent of the time. 23
To characterize the Court as probusiness or antiregulation is both simplistic and inexact. More accurate, perhaps, is to characterize it as supportive of the
rights of private property but unsure how to draw
the lines that distinguish "reasonable" from "u nreasonable" regulation. othing in the Constitution
clearly differentiates reasonable from unreasonable
regulation , a nd the Court has been ab le to invent no
consistent principle of its own to make this determination. For example, what kinds of businesses are
"affected with a public interest"? Grai n elevators and
railroads are, but are bakeries? Sugar refiners ?
Sa loo ns? And how much of commerce is "interstate"-anything that moves? Or only something
that actually crosses a state line? The Court found
itself trying to make detailed judgments that it was
not always competent to make and to invent legal
rules where no clear legal rules were possible.
In one area, however, the Supreme Court's judgments were clear: the Fourteenth a nd Fifteenth
Amendments were construed so narrowly as to give
African Americans only the most limited benefits of
their provisions. In a long series of decisions the
Court upheld segregation in schools and on railroad
cars and permitted blacks to be excluded from votin g
in many states.

Government and Political Liberty
After 1936 the Sup reme Court stopped imposing any
serious restrictions on state or federa l power to regulate the economy, leav ing such matters in the hands
of the leg islatures. From 1937 to 1974 the Supreme
Court did not overturn a single federal law designed

443

444

Chapter 16

The Judiciary

to regulate business but did overturn thirty-six congressional enactments that violated personal political liberties. It voided as unconstitutional laws that
restricted freedom of speech,24 denied passports to
communists,25 permitted the government to revoke a
person's citizenship,26 withheld a person 's mail,2 7 or
restricted the availability of government benefits.28
This new direction began when one justice
changed his mind, and it co ntinued as the composition of the Court changed. At the outset of the New
Deal the Court was, by a narrow margin, dominated
by justices who opposed the welfare state and federal
regulation based on broad grants of discretionary
authority to administrative agencies. President
Franklin Roosevelt, who was determined to get just
such legislation implemented, found himself powerless to alter the composition of the Court during his
first term (1933-1937): because no justice died
retired , he had no vacancies to fill. After his overwhelming reelection in 1936, he moved to remedy
this problem by "packing" the Court.
Roosevelt proposed a bill that would have allowed
him to appoint one new justice for each one over the
age of seventy who refused to retire, up to a total
membership of fifteen. Since there were six men in
this category then on the Supreme Court. he would
have been able to appoint six new justices, enough to
ensure a comfortable majority supportive of his eco-

nomic policies. A bitter controversy ensued, but
before the bill could be voted on. the Supreme Court,
perhaps reacting to Roosevelt's big win in the 1936
election, changed its mind . Whereas it had been
striking down several New Deal measures by votes of
five to four, now it started approving them by the
same vote. One justice, Owen Roberts , had switched
his position. This was called the "switch in time that
saved nine," but in fact Roberts had changed his
mind before the FDR plan was announced.
The "Court-packing" bill was not passed, but it was
no longer necessary. Justice Roberts had yielded before
public opinion in a way that Chief Justice Taney a
century earlier had not, thus forestalling an assault
on the Court by the other branches of government.
Shortly thereafter several justices stepped down, and
Roosevelt was able to make his own appointments (he
filled seven seats during his four terms in office). From
then on the Court turned its attention to new issuespolitical liberties and, in time. civil rights.
With the arrival in office of Chief Justice Earl Warren in 1953. the Court began its most active period
yet. Activism now arose to redefine the relationship
of citizens to the government and especially to protect the rights and liberties of citizens from governmental trespass. Although the Court has always seen
itself as protecting citizens from arbitrary government, before 1937 that protection was of a sort that

Th e "nine old men "; The Supreme Court in 1937, not long after President Franklin D. Roosevelt
tried, unsuccessfully, to "pack" it by appoillting six additional justices who would have supported
his New Deal legislation. Justice Owen]. Roberts (standing, secondji-orn the left) changed his
vote on these matters, and the Court ceased to be a barrier to the delegation of power to the
burea ucracy.

The Development oj the Federal Courts
U.S. District and Appellate Courts

MONTA NA

NORTH
DAKOTA
SOUTH
DAKOTA

8

WYOMING
NEBRASKA

o

HAWAII "'"

State bound ari es
Circuit boundari es
Di stri ct boundari es

g {)l

Note: Washington, D.C., is in a sepa rate court. Pu erto Rico is in the first circuit ; the Virgin Islands are in the

third; Guam an d the Northern Mariana Islands are in the ninth.
Source. Administrative Office of the United States Cou rts (Janu ary 1983).

conservatives preferred; after 1937 it was of a kind
that liberals preferred.

The Revival of State Sovereignty
For many decades the Supreme Court allowed Congress to pass almost any law authorized by the Constitution, no matter how it affected the states. As we
saw in Chapter 3, the Court had long held that Congress cou ld regulate almost any activity if it affected
interstate commerce, and in the Court's opinion virtua lly every activity did affect it. The states were left
with few rights to challenge federal power. But since
around 1992 the Court has backed away from this
view, By narrow majorities it has begun to restore
the view that states have the right to resist some
forms of federal action,

When Congress passed a bill that forbade anyone
from carrying a gun near a school, the Court held that
carrying guns did not affect interstate commerce, and
so the law was invalid,29 One year later it struck down
a law that allowed Indian tribes to sue the states in federal courts, arguing that Congress lacks the power to
ignore the "sovereign immunity" of states-that is,
the right, protected by the Eleventh Amendment, not
to be sued in federal court. (It has since upheld that
view in two more cases.) And the next year it held that
the Brady gun control law could not be used to require
local law enforcement officers to do background
checks on people trying to buy weapons. 30 These cases
are all hints that there are some real limits to the
supremacy of the federal government created by the
existence and powers of the severa l states,

445

446

Chapter 16

The Judiciary

The Structure of the Federal
Courts
The only federal court that the Constitution requires
is the Supreme Court, as specified in Article III. All
other federal courts and their jurisdictions are creations of Congress. Nor does the Constitution indicate how many justices shall be on the Supreme
Court (there were originally six, now there are nine)
or what its appellate jurisdiction shall be.
Congress has created two kinds of lower federal
courts to handle cases that need not be decided by the
Supreme Court: constitutional and legislative courts.
A constitutional court is one exercising the judicial
powers found in Article III of the Constitution, and
therefore its judges are given constitutional protection:
they may not be frred (they serve during "good behavior"), nor may their salaries be reduced while they are
in office. The most important of the constitutional
courts are the district courts (a total of ninety-four,
with at least one in each state, the District of Columbia, and the commonwealth of Puerto Rico) and the
courts o f appeals (one in each of eleven regions, or
circuits, plus one in the DislTict of Columbia). There
are also certain specialized courts having constitutional status, such as the Court of International Trade, but
we shall not be concerned with them.
A legislative court is one set up by Congress for
some specialized purpose and staffed with people who
have fixed terms of office and can be removed or have
their salaries reduced . Legislative courts include the
Court of Military Appeals and the territorial courts.

A federal court authorized by Article III of the Constitution that
keeps judges in office during good behavior
and prevents their salaries from being reduced .
They are the Supreme Court (created by the
Constitution) and appell ate and dist rict courts
created by Congress.
district courts The lowest fede ra l cou rts; fed eral trials can be held only here.
courts of appeals Fed era l courts th at hear
appeals from district courts; no t ria ls.
legislative courts Co urts created by Congress
for speciali zed purposes whose judges do not
enjoy the protecti ons of Article III of t he
Constitution .

constitutional court

Louis Brandeis, creator oj the "Brandeis Brief" that developed court cases based on economic and social more than
legal arguments, became the }lrst Jewish Supreme Court
justice. He served in the Co urt}i'om 1916 until 1939.

Selecting]udges
Parly background makes a difference in how judges
behave. An analysis has been done of over eighty studies of the link between party and either liberalism or
conservatism among state and federal judges in cases
involving civil liberties, criminal justice, and economic
regulation. It shows that judges who are Democrats
are more likely to make liberal decisions and Republican judges are more likely to make conservative ones. *
The party effect is not small. 31 We should not be surprised by this, since we have already seen that among
political elites (and judges are certainly elites) party
identiflcation inlluences personal ideology.

*A "liberal" decision is one that favors a civil right. a criminal defendant, or an economic regulation; a "conservative"
one opposes the right or the regulation or supports the
criminal prosecutor.

447

The Structure of the Federal Courts
But ideology does not entirely determine behavior.
So many other things shape court decisions- the
facts of the case, prior rulings by other courts, the
arguments presented by lawyers-that there is no
reliable way of predicting how judges will behave in
all matters. Presidents often make the mistake of
thinking that they know how their appointees wi ll
behave, only to be surprised by the facts. Theodore
Roosevelt appointed Oliver Wendell Ho lmes to the
Supreme Court. only to remark later. after Holmes
had voted in a way that Roosevelt did not like, that "I
could carve out of a banana a judge with more backbone than that! " Holmes, who had plenty of backbone, said that he did not "give a damn" what
Roosevelt thought. Richard Nixon, an ardent foe of
court-ordered schoo l busing, appointed Warren
Burger to be chief justice. Burger promptly sat down
and wrote the opinion upholding busing. Another
Nixon appointee. Harry Blackmun. wrote the opinion declaring the right to an abortion to be constitutiona lly protected .

Figure 16.1

Female and M inority Judicial Appointments,
1963-2003
WOMEN

32

28.5

Q)

OJ)

2c

Q)

u

0;

c..

Johnson

Nixon

Ford

Carter

Reagan

Bu sh

Clinton

G. W.
Bush

BLACKS
2c

Q)

.§
c

In theory the pres id ent
nominates a "qualified" person to be a judge, and the
Senate approves or rejects the nomination based on
those "qualifications." In fact the tradition of senatorial courtesy gives heavy weight to the preferences of
the senators from the state where a fed eral district
judge is to serve. Ordinarily the Senate will Dot confirm a district court judge if the senior senator from
the state where the district is located objects (if he is
of the president's party). The senator can exercise
this veto power by means of the "blue slip"- a blue
piece of paper on which the senator is asked to record
his or her views on the nom inee. A negative opinion,
or even failure to return the blue slip, usually kills the
nomination. Th is means that as a practical matter
the president nominates only persons recommended
to him by that key senator. Someone once suggested
that, at least with respect to district judges, the Constitution has been turned on its head. To reflect reality, he said, Article II, section 2, ought to read: "The
senators shall nominate, and by and with the consent of the Pres ident, shall appoint" federal judges .
•

Senatorial Courtesy

Of late, presidents have tried
to exercise more influence on the selection of federal
district and appellate court judges by getting the Justice Department to find candidates that not on ly are
supported by their party's senators, but also rel1ect
the political and judicial philosophy of the president.

'0
a.
a.

'"

'"
'0
Q)

OJ)

2c
Q)

t:'
Q)

4

c..
Johnson

Nixon

Ford

Carter

Reaga n

Bu sh

Cli nton

G. W.
Bush

HISPANICS
<J>

CQ)
E

1

C

'0
a.
a.

'"

'"
'0
Q)

OJ)

2c

4

Q)

t:'
Q)

c..

Johnson

Nixon

Ford

Carter

Reaga n

Bush

Cl in ton

G. W.
Bush

Source: Updated fro m Harold W. Stanley and Richard G. Niemi, Vital Statistics on American Politics, 2003- 2004 (Washingt on , D.c.: Co ngressiona l
Quarterl y, 2003), ta ble 7.5.

• The "Litmus Test"

Presidents Carter and Clinton sought out liberal.
activist judges; President Reagan sought out conservative, strict-constructionist ones. The party membership of federal jud ges makes a difference in how
they vote.32

448

Chapter 16

The Judicia ry

Because different courts of appeals have different
combinations of judges, some wil l be more liberal tha n
others. For example, there are more liberal judges in
the court of appea ls for the ninth circuit (which
includes most of the far western states) and more conservative ones in the fifth circu it (Texas, Lo uisia na,
and Mississippi). The ninth circuit takes libera l pos itions, the fIfth more conser vative ones. Since the
Supreme Court does not have time to settle every disagreement among appea ls courts, different interpretations of the law may exist in different circuits. In the
fifth, for instance, it was for a while unconstituti onal
for state universities to have afftrmative action progra ms, but in the ninth circuit th at was permitted.
These differences make some people worry about
the use of a politica l li tmu s t est-a test of ideologica l pur ity-in selecting judges. When conservatives
are out of power. they complain about how libera l
presidents use such a test; when liberals are out
power, they compla in about how conservative pres idents use it. Ma ny peo ple would like to see judges
picked on the basis of professiona l qua lifications.
without reference to ideo logy. but the courts are now
so deeply involved in political iss ues that it is h ard to
imagine what an ideologically neutra l set of pro fessiona l qualifications might be.
The litmus test h as grown in importance. with
ma ny senators n ow saying th at it is importa nt to
take ideology into account. Th ere are two issues:
whether the Judiciary Committee will report out
nominees a nd whether the nominee ca n withsta nd a
filibuster on the Senate fl oor. In 20 05, Sen ate Republican leaders threatened to pass a new rule by simple
majority vote that wo uld ba n filibusters on judicial
nominees. but at the last moment a compromise was
arra nged whereby the Democrats refu sed to filibuster
three nominees, the Repub li cans ag reed to drop two,
and fu ture filibu sters wo uld be li mited to candidates
wh o displayed "exceptional" pro blems.
The litmus test iss ue is of greatest importa nce in
selecting Supreme Co urt justices. Here there is no

litmus test An examination of the political
ideology of a nominated judge.
federal-question cases Cases concerning the
Constitution, federal laws, or treaties.
diversity cases Cases involving citizens of different states who can bring suit in federal courts.

tradition of senatoria l co urtesy. The president takes a
keen perso nal interest in the choices a nd, of late, has
sou gh t to find nominees who sha re his phi losophy. In
the Reaga n administration there were bruising fights
in the Senate over the nomination of Wil lia m Rehnquist to be chief justice (he won ) a nd Robert Bork to
be a n associate justice (he lost), with liberals pitted
aga inst co nservatives. When President George H.W.
Bu sh nominated David Souter, there were lengthy
hea r ings as li bera l se n ators tried to pin down
So uter's views on issues su ch as abortion . So uter
refused to discuss m atters on which he might later
have to judge. however. Cla rence Thomas, another
Bush nominee. a lso tried to avoid the litmus test by
saying that he had not formed an opinion on prominent aborti on cases. In his case, however. the litmu s
test issue was overs hadowed by sensational allegations from a for mer employee. Anita Hill, that
Thomas had sexua lly harassed her.
Of the 145 Supreme Co urt nominees presented to
it, the Senate has rejected 29. Only 5 of these were in
the twentieth century. The reaso ns for rejecting a
Supreme Court nominee are complex- each senator
may have a different reason- but have invo lved such
matters as th e nominee's a ll eged hosti li ty to civil
righ ts, questionable perso na l fin a ncia l dea lings, a
poor record as a lower-co urt judge, a nd Sena te opposition to the nominee's political or lega l philosophy.
No m inations of district co urt jud ges are rarely
defea ted, becau se typica lly no n omin ation is made
unless the key senators approve in adva nce.

The Jurisdiction of the
Federal Courts
We have a du a l co urt system- one sta te, one federal-and this complica tes enormously the task of
describing what kind s of cases federa l courts may
hear and how cases beg inning in the state courts
may end up before the Supreme Co urt. The Constitution lists the kinds of cases over wbich federal co urts
have jurisdiction (i n Articl e III and the Eleventh
Amendment); by imp lication all other matters are
left to state courts. Federa l co urts (see Figure 1 6.2)
can hear a ll cases "ar ising under the Co nstitu tion.
the laws of the United States , and trea ties" (these are
fed e ral-question cases), a nd cases involving citizens of different states (called diversity ca ses).

Tile Jurisdiction of tile Federal Courts
Figure 16.2

The Jurisdiction of the Federal Courts

Original jurisdiction
Cases begin in the Supreme Court
over controversies involving:
1. Two or more states
2 . The United States and a state
3. Foreign ambassadors and other
dip lomats
4. A state and a citizen of a different
state (if begun by the state)

Supreme Court of the United States
(1 co urt with 9 justices)

Appellate jurisdiction
Cases begin in another, lower court.
Hears appeals, at its discretion, from:

I

I
United States Courts of Appeals

State Supreme Courts
(if federal questions are raised)

(1 in each of 11 "circuit s" or regions

plus 1 in the District of Columbia
and 1 Federa l Circuit Court)
Hear appeals only from:

I

I
United States District Courts
(1 in each of 94 districts)

U.S. Regulatory Commissions

Court of Military Appeals

Have only original jurisdiction,
over cases involving:

Claims Court
Tax Court
Court of International Trade

1. Federal crimes
2. Civil suits under federal law
3. Civil suits between cit izens of
different states where the amount
exceeds $75,000
4. Admiralty and maritime disputes
5. Bankruptcy
6. Review of actions of certain
federal administrative age ncies
7. Other matters assigned to them
by Congress

Some kinds of cases can be heard in either federal
or state courts. For example, if citizens of different
states wish to sue one another and the matter
involves more than $ 75,000, they can do so in either
a federa l or a state court. Similarly, if someone robs a
federally insured bank, he or she has broken both
state and federal law and thus can be prosecuted in
state or federa l courts, or both. Lawyers have become
quite sophisticated in deciding whether, in a given
civil case, their clients will get better treatment in a

state or federal court. Prosecutors often send a person who has broken both federal and state law to
whichever court system is likelier to give the toughest penalty.
Sometimes defendants may be tried in both state
and federal courts for the same offense. In 1992 four
Los Angeles po lice officers accused of beating Rodney King were tried in a California state court and
acquitted of assault charges. They were then prosecuted in federal court for violating King's civil rights.

449

4 50

Chapter 16

The Judiciary

This time two of the four were co nvicted. Under the
dua l sovereignty doctrine. state and federa l authorities can prosecute the sa me person for the same co nduct. The Supreme Co urt has uph eld thi s doctrine on
two grounds: First. each level of government ha s the
right to enact laws serving its own purposes. 33 As a
resul t federal civ il rights charges could have been
bro ught against the offi cers even if they had already
bee n convicted of assa ult in state co urt (though as a
practical matter thi s would have been unlikely). Second, neither level of government wants the other to
be able to block prosecution of an accused perso n
who has the sympathy of the authorities at one level.
For example, when certain sou thern state courts
were in sympathy with whites who had lyn ched
blacks. the absence of the dual sovereignty doctrine
would have meant that a trumped-up acquittal in
state court would have barred federal prosecution.
Furthermore, a matter that is exclusively within
the province of a state court-for exa mple. a criminal case in which the defendant is charged with
violating on ly a state law-can be appea led to the
U.S. Supreme Court under certa in circumstances
(described below). Thu s federa l judges ca n overturn
state co ur t rulings even when they had no jurisdi ction over the origin a l matter. Under what circumstances this shou ld occur has been the subj ect of
long-standin g controversy between the sta te and federa l co urts.
Some matters. however. a re excl usively under the
jurisdi ction of federal courts. When a federal criminal law is broken- but not a state one- the case is
heard in federal district court. If you wish to appeal
the decision of a federa l regulatory agency, such as
the Federal Communications Commission, you can
do so only before a federal court of appeals. And if
you wish to declare bankruptcy, you do so in federal
court. If there is a controversy between two state
governments-say, Ca lifornia and Arizona sue each
other over which state is to use how mu ch water
from the Colorado River- the case ca n be hea rd only
by the Supreme Court.
The vast majority of a ll cases heard by federal
courts begin in the district courts. The volum e of

writ of certiorari

A n order by a hig her co urt
directing a lowe r court to send up a case f or
review.

busin ess there is huge. In 2002 the 650 or so district
court judges received over 300.000 cases (about 500
per judge). Most of the cases heard in federa l courts
involve rather stra ightforward applications of law ;
few lead to the making of new public policy. Cases
that do affect how the law or the Constitution is
interpreted can begin with seemin gly minor events.
For exa mp le, a maj or broadening of the Bill of
Rights- requiring for the first time that a ll accused
persons in state as well as federal crimina l trials be
supplied with a lawyer, free if necessary- began
when impoverished Clarence Earl Gideon , imprisoned in Florid a, wrote an appeal in pencil on prison
stationery and sent it to the Supreme Court. 34
The Supreme Court does not have to hear any
appeal it does not want to hear. At one time it was
required to listen to cer tain appeals. but Congress
has changed the law so that now the Court can pick
the cases it wants to consider.
It does this by issuing a writ o f certiorari. Certiorari is a Latin word meanin g. roughly, "made more
certa in": lawyers a nd judges have abbrev iated it to
cert. It works this way: The Court co nsiders all the
petitions it receives to rev iew lower-court decision s. If
four justices ag ree to hear a case, cert is issued and
the case is sched uled for a hearing.
In decidin g whether to grant certiora ri , the Court
tries to reserve its time for cases dec ided by lower federa l co urts or by the highest sta te co urts in which a
significa nt federal or constitutiona l question ha s
been raised. For example, the Co urt w ill often grant
certiora ri when one or both of the foll ow ing is true:
• Two or m ore federa l circui t co urts of appeals have
decided the same iss ue in different ways.
• The highest court in a state has held a federa l or
state law to be in violation of the Constitution or
has upheld a state law against the claim that it is
in violation of the Constitution.
In a typical yea r the Co urt may consider over
seven thousand petitions aski ng it to rev iew decisions of lower or state courts. It rarely accepts more
than about one hundred of them for fu ll review.
In exercisin g its discretion in gra nting certiorari ,
the Supreme Co urt is on the horns of a dilemma. If it
grants it frequently, it will be inundated with cases.
As it is, the Co urt's workload has quintupled in the
last fifty years. If. on the other hand , the Co urt grants
certiorari on ly rare ly, then the federa l co urts of
appea ls have the last word on the interpreta tion of

Gettil1g to Court

Clarence Earl Gideon studied la w books while in prison so
that lIe could write a/1 appeal to tlze Sup reme Court. His
handwritten appeal asked that his conviction be set aside
beca use I!e Iwd 110t iJeen provided witl! all attorney. His
appeal was grallted.

the Constitution and federal laws, and since there are
twelve of these, staffed by about 167 judges, they
may well be in disagreement. In fact this has already
h appened: beca use the Supreme Co urt rev iews only
about 1 or 2 percent of appeals court cases, applicable federal law may be different in different pa rts of
the co untry.35 One proposal to deal with this dil emma is to devote the Supreme Court's time entirely to
major question s of constitutional interpretation and
to crea te a national co urt of appeals that would
ens ure that the twelve drcuit courts of appea ls are
producing uniform decisions. 36
Because the Supreme Court has a h eavy workload , the influence wielded by law clerks h as grown.
These clerks- recent grad uates of law schools hired
by the justices-playa big role in deciding which
cases should be heard under a writ of certiorari.
Indeed, some of the opini ons written by the justices
are drafted by the clerks. Since the reasons for a decision may be as important as the decision itself. and
since these reasons a re sometimes created by the
clerks, the power of the clerks ca n be Significant.

-t

elected to any office, have access to the ma ss media,
be a member of an interest group, or be otherwise
powerful or rich. Once the contend ing parties are
before the courts, they are legally equa l.
It is too easy to believe this theory uncriti ca lly or
to di smiss it cynically. In fact it is hard to get before
the Supreme Court: it rejects over 96 percent of the
applications for certiorari that it receives. And the
costs involved in getting to the Court can be high. To
apply for certiorari costs only $300 (plus forty copies
of the petition). but if certiorari is granted and the
case is heard, the costs-for lawyers a nd for copies of
the lower-co urt records in the case-can be very
high. And by then one has already paid for the cost of
the first hearing in the district court and probably
one appeal to the circuit court of appeals. Furthermore. the time it takes to settl e a matter in federal
court can be qui te long.
But there are ways to make these costs lower. If
you are indigent- without fund s-you can fil e and
be heard as a pauper for nothing; about half the petitions arriving before the Supreme Court are in
forma pauperis (such as the one from Gideon,
described earlier). If your case bega n as a criminal
trial in the district courts a nd you are poor, the government will supply you with a lawyer at no charge.
If the matter is not a criminal case a nd you cannot
afford to hire a lawyer, interest groups representing a
wide spectrum of opinion sometimes are will ing to
take up the cause if the issue in the case seems suffi ciently important. The American Civil Liberties
Union (ACLU), a liberal group, represents some people who believe that their freedom of speech has been
abrid ged or that their co nstitutional rights in criminal proceedings have been viol ated. The Center for
Individual Rights, a co nservative group, represents
some people who feel that they have been victimized
by racial quotas.
But interest groups do much more than just help
people pay their bills. Many of the most important
cases decided by the Court got there beca use an
interest group orga nized the case, found the plaintiffs, chose the legal strategy, and mobilized legal
allies. The NAACP has brought many key civil rights

Getting to Court

In theory the courts are the great equalizer in the
federa l government. To use the courts to settle a
question, or even to alter fundam entally the accepted interpretation of the Constitution, one need not be

in forma pauperis

A method whereby a poor
person can have his or her case heard in federal court without charge .

451

4 52

Chapter 16

The Judiciary

cases on behalf of individuals. Although in the past
most such cases were brought by liberal interest
groups, of late conservative interest groups have
entered the courtroom on behalf of individuals. One
helped sue CBS for televising a progra m that allegedly libeled General William Westmoreland, once the
American commander in Vietnam. (Westmoreland
lost the case.) And many importa nt issues a re raised
by attorneys representing state and local gover nments. Several pri ce-fi xing cases have been won by
state attorneys genera l on behalf of consumers in
their states.

Fee Shifting
Unlike what happens in most of Europe, each party to
a lawsuit in this co untry must pay its own way. (In
England, by contrast, if you sue someone and lose,
you pay the winner's costs as well as your own.) But
various laws have made it easier to get someone else
to pay. Fee shifting enables the plaintiff (the party
that initiates the su it) to collect its costs from the
defendant if the defenda nt loses, at least in certain
kinds of cases. For example, if a corporation is found
to have violated the antitrust laws, it must pay the
legal fees of the winner. If an environmentalist group
sues the Environmental Protection Agency, it ca n get
the EPA to pay the group 's lega l costs. Even more
important to individuals, Section 1983 of Chapter 42
of the United States Code allows a citizen to sue a state
or local government officia l-say, a police officer or a
school superintendent- who has deprived th e citizen
of some constitution al right or withheld some benefit
to which the citizen is entitled. If the citizen wins. he
or she can collect money damages a nd lawyers' fees
from the government. Citizens, more aware of their
legal rights, have become more litigious, and a flood of
such "Section 1983" suits h as burdened the courts.
The Supreme Court has restricted fee shifting to cases
authorized by statute. 37 but it is clear that the drift of
fee shifting A rule that allows a plaintiff to
recover costs from the defendant if the plaintiff wins.
plaintiff The party that initiates a lawsuit.
standing A legal rule stating who is aut horized to start a lawsuit.
sovereign immunity The rule that a citi zen
cannot sue the government without the government's consent.

policy has made it cheaper to go to court-at least for
so me cases.

Standing
There is, in addition, a nonfinan cial restriction on
getting into federal court. To sue, one must have
standin g, a legal concept that refers to who is entitled to bring a case. It is especia lly important in
determining who ca n challenge the laws or actions
of the government itself. A comp lex and cha nging set
of rules governs standings; so me of the more important ones are these:
• There mu st be an actua l controversy between real
adversaries. (You cannot bring a "fr iendly" suit
against someo ne, hop ing to lose in order to prove
your friend right. You cannot ask a federa l court
for an opinion on a hypothetical or imaginary
case or ask it to render an advisory opinion.)
• You must show that you have been harmed by the
law or practice about which you are complaining.
(It is not enough to dislike what the government or
a corporation or a labor union does; you must show
that you were actually harmed by that action.)
• Merely being a taxpayer does not ordinarily entitl e
you to cha llenge the constitutiona lity of a federal
governmental action. (You may not want your tax
mon ey to be spent in certain ways, but your remedy is to vote against the politicia ns doing the
spending; the federal courts will genera lly require
that you show some other perso nal harm before
you can sue.)
Congress and the co urts have recently made it
easier to acquire standing. It has always been the
rule that a citizen could ask the courts to order federal officials to carry out so me act that they were u nder
a legal obligation to perform or to refrain fro m some
action that was contrary to law. A citizen can also
sue a government official personally in order to co llect damages if the official acted contrary to law. For
example, it was for long the case that if an FBI agent
broke into your office without a search warrant, you
could sue the agent and, if you won, co llect money.
However, you cannot sue the government itself without its consent. This is the doctrine of sover eign
immunity. For instance, if the army accidenta lly
kills your cow while testing a new ca nnon, you cannot sue the government to recover the cost of the
cow unless the government agrees to be sued. (Since
testing cannons is legal, you cannot sue the army

Gettil1g to Court

453

officer who fired the cannon.) By statute Congress
ha s given its consent for the government to be sued in
many cases involving a dispute over a contract or
da mage done as a result of negligence (for example,
the dead cow). Over the years these statutes have
made it easier to take the government into court as a
defendant.
Even some of the oldest ru les defining standin g
have been liberalized. The rule that merely bein g a
taxpayer does not entitle you to cha ll enge in court a
government decision has been relaxed where the citizen claims that a right guara nteed under the First
Amendment is being violated. The Supreme Court
allowed a taxpayer to cha llenge a federa l law that
wou ld have given fin a ncia l a id to parochial (or
church-related) schoo ls on the grounds that this aid
violated th e co nstitutiona l requirement of separation
between church and state. On the other hand , another taxpayer suit to force the CIA to make public its
budget failed beca use the Court decided that the taxpayer did not have standing in matters of this sort. 38

Class-Action Suits
Under certain circumstances a citizen can benefi t
directly from a court decision, even though the citizen himself or herself has not gone into co urt. This
can happen by means of a cla ss-action suit: a case
brought in to court by a person on behalf not only of
himself or herself, but of all other perso ns in simil a r
circumstances. Among the most famous of these
was the 1954 case in which the Supreme Court
found that Linda Brown , a black girl attending the
fifth grade in the Topeka, Ka nsas, pub lic schoo ls, was
denied the equ a l protection of the laws (guaranteed
und er the Fo urteenth Amendment) because the
schoo ls in To peka were seg regated. The Court did not
limit its decision to Lind a Brown's r ight to attend an
un seg rega ted school but extended it- as Brown's
lawyers from the NAACP had asked- to cover all
"o thers simi la rly situated." 39 It was not easy to
des ign a co ur t order that would eliminate segregation in the schoo ls, but the pri ncipl e was clearly
establ ished in this class action.
Since the Brown case, ma ny oth er groups have
been quick to take advantage of the opportunity created by class-action suits. By thi s mea ns the courts
could be used to give relief not simp ly to a pa rticular
person but to all those represented in the suit. A
la ndmark class-action case was that which challenged the malapportionment of sta te leg islative

Linda Brown was refused admission to a white elementary school
in Topeka, Kansas. On her behalf the NAAC P brought a classaction suit that resulted in the 1954 landll1ark Supreme Court
decision Brown v. Board of Education.

districts (see Chapter 13).40 There are thousa nds of
class-action suits in the federal co urts involving civil
righ ts . the rights of priso ners, a ntitrust suits against
corporati ons, a nd other matters. These sui ts became
more co mmon partly beca use people were beginnin g
to have new co ncerns that were not being met by
Congress a nd partly because some class-action suits
became quite profitable. The NAACP got no money
from Lind a Brown or from the Topeka Board of Education in co mpensation for its long and expensive
labors, but beginning in the 19 60s court rules were
cha nged to make it financially attractive for lawyers
to br ing certain kinds of class-action suits.

class-action suit A case brought by someone
to help him or her and all others who are similarly situated .

454

Chapter 16

Dible 16.2

The Judiciary

Supreme Court Justices in Order of Seniority, 2004

Name (Birth Date)

Home State

Prior Experience

Appointed By (Year)

Wil li am H. Rehnquist, Chief
Justice (1924)
John Pau l Stevens (1916)
Sandra Day O'Connor (1930)
Antonin Scalia (1936)
Anth o ny Kennedy (1936)
David Souter (1939)
Cl arence Th omas (1948)
Ruth Bader Ginsbu rg (193 3)
Stephen Breyer (1938)

Ari zona

Justice; assistant
att orn ey general
Federal judge
Stat e judge
Federal judge
Federal judge
Stat e judge
Federa l judge
Federal jud ge
Federa l jud ge

Rea gan (1986) as chief;
Nixo n (1971 ) as j ust ice
Ford (1975)
Reaga n (1981)
Reaga n (1 986)
Reagan (1988)
Bush (19 90)
Bu sh (1 991 )
Cl inton (1993)
Clinto n (1 994)

Illino is
A r izon a
New Yo rk
Ca liforni a
New Ha m psh ire
Georgi a
New York
M assach usetts

Suppose, for example, that you think your telephone compa ny overcha rged you by $7 5. You could
try to hire a lawyer to get a refund , but not many
lawyers would take the case, beca use there would be
no money in it. Even if you were to win, the lawyer
would stand to earn no more tha n perhaps one-third
of the settlement, or $25. Now suppose that you
bring a class action against the compa ny on beh alf of
everybody who was overch arged. Millions of dollars
might be at stake; lawyers would line up eagerly to
take the case, because their share of the settlement. if
they won, would be huge. The oppor tunity to win
profitable class-action suits, combined w ith the possibility of having the loser pay the attorneys ' fees, led
to a proliferation of such cases.
In response to the increase in its worldoad, the
Supreme Court decided in 1974 to tighten drastically the rules governing these suits. It held that it
would no longer hear (except in certain cases defined
by Co ngress, such as civil rights matters) class-action
suits seeking monetary damages unless each and
every ascertainable member of the class was individually notified of the case. To do this is often prohibitively expensive (imagine trying to find and send a
letter to every customer that may have been overch arged by the telephone compa ny!), and so the
number of such cases declined a nd the number of
lawyers seeking them out dropped. 4 1
But it remains easy to bring a cl ass-action suit in
most state courts. State Fa rm a uto mobil e insura nce
compa ny was told by a state judge in a small Illinois
town that it must pay over $ 1 billi on in damages on
behalf of a "national" class, even though no one in
this class had been notified. Big cl ass-action su its
powerfully affect how courts make public poli cy.

Such suits have forced into ba nkruptcy companies
making asbestos a nd silicone breast implants and
have threatened to put ou t of business tobacco compa nies and gun ma nufacturers. (Iro nica lly, in some
of these cases. such as the one invo lving breast
implants, there was no scientific ev idence showin g
that the product was harmful. ) Some class-action
suits, such as the one ending school segregation, are
good, but others are frivolous efforts to get compan ies to pay large fees to the lawyers who file the suits.
In sum, getting into co ur t depends on hav ing
sta ndi ng a nd having resources. The rules governing
sta nding are complex a nd cha ngin g, but generally
they have been broadened to make it easier to enter
the federal co urts, especially for the purpose of cha llenging the actions of the government. Obtaining the
reso urces is not easy but h as become easier because
laws in some cases now provide for fee shifting. private interest groups are w illing to fin ance cases, and
it is so metimes possible to bring a class-action suit
that lawyers find lucrative.

The Supreme Court in Action
If your case should find its way to the Supreme
Court-and of co urse the odds are that it will notyou will be able to participate in one of the more
impressive, sometimes dramatic ceremon ies of American public life. The Court is in session in its white
marble building for thirty-six weeks out of each year,
[rom early October until the end of June. The nine justices read briefs in their individual orfices, hear oral
arguments in the stately cour troom. and discuss their

The Sup reme Court in Action
decisions with one another in a conference room
where no outsider is ever allowed.
Most cases. as we have seen. come to the Court on
a writ of certiorari. The lawyers for each side may
then submit their briefs. A brief is a document that
sets forth the facts of the case. summarizes the lowercourt decision. gives the arguments for the side represented by th e lawyer who wrote the brief. and
discusses the other cases that the Court has decided
bear on the issue. Then the lawyers are allowed to
present their oral arguments in open court. They
usually summarize their briefs or emphasize particular points in them. and they are strictly limited in
time-usually to no more than a half hour. (The
lawyer speaks from a lectern that has two lights on it.
When the white light goes on. the attorney has five
minutes remaining; when the red fl ashes. he or she
m ust stop-instantly.) The oral arguments give the
justices a chance to question th e lawyers. sometimes
searchingly.
Since the federal government is a party-as either
plaintiff or defendant- to about half the cases that
the Supreme Court hears. the government's top trial
lawyer. the solicitor general of the United States.
appears frequently before the Court. The solicitor general is the third-ranking officer of the Department of
Justice. right after the attorney general and deputy
attorney general. The solicitor general decides what
cases the government will appeal from lower courts
and personally approves every case the government
presents to the Supreme Court. In recent years the
solicitor general has often been selected from the
ranks of distinguished law school professors.
In addition to the arguments made by lawyers for
the two sides in a case. written briefs and even oral
arguments may also be offered by "a friend of the
court. " or amicus curiae. An amicus brief is from an
interested party not directly involved in the suit. For
example. when Allan Bakke complained that he had
been the victim of "reverse discrimination" when he
was denied admission to a University of California
medical school. fifty-eight amicus briefs were llled supporting or opposing his position. Before such briefs can
be llled. both parties must agree or the Court must
grant permission. Though these briefs sometimes offer
new arguments. they are really a kind of polite lobbying of the Court that declare which interest groups are
on which side. The ACLU. the NAACP. the AFL-Cm.
and the US. government itself have been among the
leading sources of such briefs.

These briefs are not the only source of influence
on the justices' views. Legal periodicals such as the
Harvard Law Review and the Yale Law Journal are frequently consulted. and citations to them often
appear in the Court's decisions. Thus the outside
world of lawyers and law professors can help shape.
or at least supply arguments for. the conclusions of
th e justices.
The justices retire every Frid ay to their conference
room. where in complete secrecy they debate the
cases they have heard. The chief justice speaks first.
followed by the other justices in order of seniority.
After th e arguments they vote. traditionally in
reverse order of seniority: the newest justice votes
first. the chief justice last. By this process an able
chief justice can exercise considerable influence-in
guiding or limiting debate. in setting forth the issues.
and in handling sometimes temperamental personalities. In deciding a case. a majority of the justices
must be in agreement: if there is a tie. the lowercourt decision is left standing. (There can be a tie
among nine justices if one is ill or disqualifies himself
or herself because of prior involvement in the case.)
Though the vote is what counts. by tradition the
Court usually issues a written opinion explaining
its decision. Sometimes the opinion is brief and
unsigned (called a per curiam opinion); sometimes
it is quite lon g and signed by the justices agreeing
with it. If the chief justice is in the majority. he will
either write the opinion or assign the task to a justice
wh o agrees with him. If he is in the minority. the senior justice on the winning side will decide who writes
the Court's opinion. There are three kinds of opinions-an opinion of the Court (reflecting the
majority 's view) . a concurring opinion (an opinion by one or more justices who agree with the

brief A written statement by an attorney that
summarizes a case and the laws and rulings
that support it.
amicus curiae A brief submitted by a "friend
of the court."

per curiam opinion

A brief, unsigned court

opinion.

opinion of the court

A signed opinion of a
majority of the Supreme Court.
concurring opinion A signed opinion in
which one or more members agree with the
majority view but for different reasons .

455

4 56

Chapter 16

The Judiciary

The members of the US. Supreme Court: from left to right, Antonin Scalia, Ruth Bader
Ginsburg, John Paul Stevens, David Sou tel; William Rehnquist, Clarence Thoma s, Salldrn Day
O'ConI101; Stephen Breyel; Anthony Kennedu.

majority's conclusion but for different reasons that
they wish to express), and a dissentin g opinion
(the opinion of the justices on the losing side). Each
justice has three or four law clerks to help h im or her
review the many petitions the Court receives, study
cases, and write op inions.
People like to think of the courts as expressing
"liberal" or "conservative" opinions, and in many
cases they seem to do just that. But that is far from
the who le story. In many cases, perhaps two-fifths of
those decided by the Supreme Court, the decisions
are unanimous. Even two justices as different as
Antonin Scalia and Ruth Bader Ginsburg vote the
same way much of the time. The most important
thing to remember is not the decision but the reasons

behind the decision. Many times ju dges will vote fo r
a position that they don't personally like but fee l
ob liged to support because that is how th e law reads.

The Power of the Federal

Courts
The great majority of the cases heard in th e federal
courts have little or nothing to do with changes in
pu blic policy: peop le accused of bank robbery are
tried, disputes over contracts are settled, personalinjury cases are heard, and the patent law is app lied.
In most instances the courts are simply app lying a
relatively settled body of law to a specific controversy.

The Power to Make Policy
dissenting opinion A signed opinion in which
one or more justices disagree with the majority
view.

The courts make policy whenever they reinterpret
the law or the Constitution in significant ways ,
extend the reach of existing laws to cover matters not
previously thought to be covered by them. or design

The Power of the Fe deral Courts
remedies for problems that involve the judges' acting
in administrative or legislative ways. By any of these
tests the courts have become exceptionally powerful.
One measure of that power is the fa ct that more
than 160 federal laws have been declared unco nstitutional. And as we shall see, on matters where Congress feels strongly, it can often get its way by passing
slightly revised versions of a voided law.
Another measure, a nd perhaps a more revealing
one, is the frequency with which the Supreme Court
changes its mind. An informal rule of judicial decision-making has been stare decisis, meaning "let
the decision stand. " It is the prinCiple of precedent: a
cou rt case today should be settled in accordance with
prior decisions on similar cases. (What constitutes a
similar case is not always clear; lawyers are especially gifted at finding ways of showing that two cases
are different in some relevant way.) There are two
reasons why precedent is important. The practical
reason should be obvious: if the mea ning of the
law continually changes, if the decisions of judges
become wholly unpredictable, then human affairs
affected by those laws and decisions become chaotic.
A contract signed today might be inva lid tomorrow.
The oth er reason is at least as important: if the principle of equa l justice means anything, it means that
similar cases should be decided in a similar manner.
On the other hand, times change, and the Court can
make mistakes. As Justice Felix Frankfurter once
said, "Wisdom too often never comes, and so one
ought not to reject it merely because it comes late."42
However compelling the arguments fo r fl exibility,
the pace of change can become dizzying. By one
count the Court has overruled its own prev ious decisions in over 260 cases since 1810. 43 In fact it may
have done it more often, because sometimes the
Court does not say that it is abandoning a precedent,
claiming instead that it is merely distinguishing the
present case from a previous one.
A third measure of judicial power is the degree to
which courts are willing to handle matters once left
to the legislature. For example, the Co urt refused for
a long time to hear a case about the size of congressional districts, no matter how unequal their populations.44 The determination of con gressional district
boundaries was regarded as a political questionthat is, as a matter that the Constitution left entirely
to another branch of government (in this case, Congress) to decide for itself. Then in 1962 the Court
decided that it was competent after all to handle this
matter, and the notion of a "political question"

became a much less important (but by no means
absent) barrier to judicial power.45
By all odds the most powerful indicator of judicial
power can be found in the kinds of remed ies that the
courts will impose. A remedy is a judicial order setting forth what must be done to correct a situ ation
that a judge believes to be wrong. In ordinary cases,
such as when one person sues another, the remedy is
straightforward: the loser must pay the winner for
some injury that he or she has caused, the loser must
agree to abide by the terms of a contract he or she has
broken, or the loser must promise not to do some
unpleasant thing (such as dumping garbage on a
neighbor's lawn). Today, however, judges design
remedies that go far beyond what is required to do j ustice to the individual parties who actually appear in
court. The remedies now imposed often apply to large
groups and affect the circumstances under which
thousands or even millions of people work, study, or
live. For example, when a federal district judge in
Alabama heard a case brought by a prison inmate in
that state, he issued an order not simply to improve
the lot of that prisoner but to revamp the administration of the entire prison system. The result was an
improvement in the living conditions of many prisoners, at a cost to the state of an estimated $40 million
a year. Similarly, a person who feels entitled to welfare
payments that have been denied him or her may sue
in court to get the money, and the court order will in
all likelihood affect all welfare recipients. In one case
cer tain court orders made an additional one hundred
thousand people eligible for welfare.46
The basis for sweeping court orders can sometimes
be found in the Constitution; the Alabama prison decision, for example, was based on the judge's interpretation of the Eighth Amendment, which prohibits "cruel
and unusual punishments."47 Others are based on
court interpretations of federal laws. The Civil Rights
Act of 1964 forbids discrimination on grounds of
"race, co lor, or national origin" in any program receiving federal financial assistance. The Supreme Court
stare decisis

"Let the decision stand," or
allowing prior rulings to control the current
case.
political question An issue the Supreme Court
will allow the executive and legislative branches decide.
remedy A judicial order enforcing a right or
redressing a wrong .

457

Supreme Court to Decide
Con~titutiona1ity of
CapItal Punishment
March 20

L

illUl fr-=---------'

WASHINGTON
The Supreme COllrt h b
I as een asked to decl'de
whether the death
. .
pena ty IS
'.
sian In this impo·t
. cOnSt/ tlltlonal. A de .
1 ant case IS expected by ]
CIline . . .

MEMORANDUM

To: Justice Robert Gilbert
From: David Wilson, law clerk
Before I draft your opinion, I wan~ to know how you feel about declaring the death
penalty unconstitutional.
Arguments for:
1. As enforced, the death penalty tends to be di scriminatory. Black convicts are, in
some cases, more likely to be executed than white ones .
2. The death penalty is irrevocable. If an innocent man is executed, he cannot be
brought back to life when his innocence becomes known .
3. The death penalty is "cruel and unusual punishment " that is banned by the
Constitution.
Arguments against:
1. The Constitution 00es not ban the death penalty.
2. The death penalty existed when the Constitution and Bill of Rights were written .
Their authors meant by "cruel and unusual punishment" the use of torture .
3. When a legislature decides to punish murder by death, its views are entitled to
deference.
4. The re is no strong evidence that the death penalty is imposed in a discriminatory
manner.
Your decision:
Ban death penalty _ __
Do not ban death penalty _ __

The Power of the Federal Courts
interpreted that as meaning that the San Francisco
school system was obliged to teach English to Chinese
students unable to speak it. 48 Since a Supreme Court
decision is the law of the land , the impact of that ruling was not limited to San Francisco. Local courts a nd
legislatures elsewhere decided that that decision
meant that classes must be taught in Spanish for Hispanic children. What Congress meant by the Civil
Rights Act is not clear; it mayor may not have believed
that teaching Hispanic children in English rather than
Spanish was a form of discrimination. What is important is that it was the Court, not Congress, that decided what Congress meant.

Views of]udicial Activism
Judicial activism has, of course, been controversial.
Those who support it argue that the federal courts
must correct injustices when the other branches of

The activism of federal courts is exemplified by the sweeping orders they have issued to correct such problems as
overcrowded prisons.

the federal government, or the states, refuse to do so.
The courts are the institution of last resort for those
without the votes or the influence to obtain new
laws, and especially for the poor and powerless. After
all, Congress and the state legislatures tolerated segregated public schools for decades. If the Supreme
Court had not declared segregation unconstitutional
in 1954, it might still be law today.
Those who criticize judicial activism rejoin that
judges usually have no special expertise in matters of
school administration, prison management, environmental protection, and so on; they are lawyers ,
expert in defining rights and duties but not in designing and managing complex institutions. Furthermore, however desirable court-declared rights and
principles may be, implementing those principles
means balanCing the co nflicting needs of various
interest groups, raising and spending tax monies,
and assessing the costs and benefits of complicated
alternatives. Finally, federal judges are not elected;
they are appointed and are thus immune to popular
control. As a result, if they depart from their traditional role of making careful and cautious interpretations of what a law or the Constitution means and
instead begin formulating wholly new policies, they
become unelected legislators.
Some people think that we have activist courts
because we have so many lawyers. The more we take
matters to co urts for resolution, the more likely it is
that the courts will become powerful. It is true that
we have more lawyers in proportion to our population tha n most other nations. There is one lawyer for
every 325 Americans, but only one for every 970
Britons, every 1,220 Germans, and every 8,3 33
Japanese. 49 But that may well be a symptom, not a
cause, of court activity. As we suggested in Chapter
4, we have an adversary culture based on a n emphasis on individual rights and an implicit antagonism
between the people and the government. Generally
speaking, lawyers do not create cases; contending
interests do , thereby generating a demand for
lawyers. 50 Furthermore, we had more lawyers in
relation to our population in 1900 than in 1970, yet
the courts at the turn of the twentieth century were
far less active in public affairs. In fact, in 1932 there
were more court cases per 100,000 people than
there were in 1972.
A more plausible reason for activist courts has
been the developments discussed earlier in this cha pter that have made it easier for people to get standing
in the co urts, to pay for the costs of litigation, and to

459

460

Chapter 16

The Judiciary

bring class-action suits. The courts and Congress
have gone a long way toward allowing private citizens to become "private attorneys general." Making
it easier to get into court increases the number of
cases being heard. For example, in 1961 civil rights
cases. prisoners' rights cases, and cases under the
Social Security laws were relatively uncommon in
federal court. Between 1961 and 1990 the increase
in the number of such matters was phenomenal:
civil rights cases rose over sixtyfold and prisoners'
petitions over fortyfold. Such matters are the fastestgrowing portion of the courts' civil workload.

Legislation and the Courts
An increase in cases will not by itself lead to sweeping remedies. For that to occur, the law must be sufficiently vague to permit judges wide latitude in
interpreting it, and the judges must want to exercise
that opportunity fully. The Constitution is filled with
words of seemingly ambiguous meaning-" due
process of law," the "equal protection of the laws,"
the "privileges or immunities of citizens. " Such
phrases may have been clear to the Framers, but to
the Supreme Court they have become equivocal or
elastic. How the Court has chosen to interpret such
phrases has changed greatly over the last two centuries in ways that can be explained in part by the
personal political beliefs of the justices.
Increasingly Congress has passed laws that also
contain vague language, thereby adding immeasurably to the courts' opportunities for designing remedies. Various civil rights acts outlaw discrimination
but do not say how one is to know whether discrimination has occurred or what should be done to correct it if it does occur. That is left to the courts and the
bureaucracy. Various regulatory laws empower
administrative agencies to do what the "public interest" requires but say little about how the public interest is to be defined. Laws intended to alleviate poverty
or rebuild neighborhoods speak of "citizen participation" or "maximum feasible participation" but do not
explain who the citizens are that should participate,
or how much power they should have.
In addition to laws that require interpretation,
other laws induce litigation. Almost every agency that
regulates business will make decisions that cause the
agency to be challenged in court-by business firms iJ
the regulations go too far, by consumer or labor organizations if they do not go far enough. One study

showed that the federal courts of appeals heard over
three thousand cases in which they had to review the
decision of a regulatory agency. In two-thirds of them
the agency's position was supported; in the other third
the agency was overruled. 51 Perhaps one-filth of these
cases arose out of agencies or programs that did not
even exist in 1960. The federal government today is
much more likely to be on the defensive in court than
it was twenty or thirty years ago.
Finally, the attitudes of the judges powerfully
affect what they will do, especially when the law
gives them wide latitude. Their decisions and opinions have been extensively analyzed- well enough,
at least, to know that different judges often decide the
same case in different ways. Conservative southern
federal judges in the 1950s, for example, often resisted plans to desegregate public schools, while judges
with a different background authorized bold plans. 52
Some of the greatest disparities in judiCial behavior
can be found in the area of sentencing criminals. 53

* Checks on Judicial Power
No institution of government, including the courts,
operates without restraint. The fact that judges are
not elected does not make them immune to public
opinion or to the views of the other branches of government. How important these restraints are varies
from case to case, but in the broad course of history
they have been Significant.
One restraint exists because of the very nature of
courts. A judge has no police force or army; decisions
that he or she makes can sometimes be resisted or
ignored, if the person or organization resisting is not
highly visible and is willing to run the risk of being
caught and charged with contempt of court. For
example, long after the Supreme Court had decided
that praying and Bible reading could not take place in
public schools, 54 schools all over the country were
still allowing prayers and Bible reading. 55 Years after
the Court declared segregated schools to be unconstitutional, scores of school systems remained segregated. On the other hand , when a failure to comply is
easily detected and punished, the courts' power is
usually unchallenged. When the Supreme Court
declared the income tax to be unconstitutional in
1895, income tax collections promptly ceased. When
the Court in 1952 declared illegal President Truman's

Chec1(s
effort to seize the steel mills in order to stop a strike.
the management of the mills was immediately
returned to their owners.

Congress and the Courts
Congress has a number of ways of checking the judiciary. It can gradually alter the composition of the
judiciary by the kinds of appointments that the Senate is willing to confirm, or it can impeach judges
that it does not like. Fifteen federal judges have been
the object of impeachment proceedings in our history, and nine others have resigned when such proceedings seemed likely. Of the fifteen who were
impeached. seven were acquitted, four were convicted, and one resigned. The most recent convictions
were those of Alcee Hastings of Florida and Walter

T ·n ·I·V· I·A
.......................

The Supreme COUI1
Supreme Court justice who
served the longest

William O. Douglas: 36 years
{1939-1975}

Only Supreme Court justice to
run for president

Charles Evans Hughes {resigned
from Court in 1916 to seek presidency; lost to Woodrow Wilson}

Only president to become
Supreme Court justice

William Howard Taft {president,
1909-1913; chief justice,
1921-1930}

First Catholic Supreme Court
justice

Roger B. Taney {1836-1864}

First Jewish Supreme Court
justice

Louis Brandeis {1916-1939}

First black Supreme Court
justice

Thurgood Marshall (19671991)

First woman Supreme Court
justice

Sandra Day O'Connor {1981 to
present}

Only Supreme Court justice to
be impeached

Samuel Chase (impeached by
House in 1804; acquitted
by Senate)

Only Supreme Court justice
whose grandson also served on
the Court

John Harlan (1877- 1911),
whose grandson John Harlan
served from 1954 to 1971

011

Judicial Power

Nixon of Mississippi, both in 1989,51; In practice,
however, confirmation and impeachment proceedings do not make much of an impact on the federal
courts because simple policy disagreements are not
generally rega rded as adequate grounds for votin g
aga inst a judicial nominee or for sta rting an
impeachment effort.
Congress can alter the number of judges, though,
and by increasing the number sharply, it can give a
president a chance to appoint judges to hi s liking. As
described above, a "Court-packing" plan was proposed (unsuccessfully) by Franklin Roosevelt in 1937
specifically to change the political persuasion o[ the
Supreme Court. In 1978 Cong ress passed a bill creating 152 new federal district and appellate judges to
help ease the workload of the federal judiciary. This
bill gave President Carter a chance to appoint over 40
percent of the federal bench. In 1984 an additional
eighty-four judges hips were created; by 1988 President Reagan had appointed about half o[ all federal
judges. In 1990 an additional seventy-two judges
were authorized.
During and after the Civil War, Congress may
have been trying to influence Supreme Court decisions when it changed the size of the Court three
times in six years (raising it from nine to ten in 1863,
lowering it again from ten to seven in 1866, and raising it again [rom seven to nine in 1869 ).
Congress and the states can also undo a Supreme
Court dec ision interpreting the Const itution by
amending that document. This happens , but rarely:
the Eleventh Amendment was ratified to prevent a
citizen from suing a state in federal court; the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth were ratified to
undo the Dred Scott decision regarding slavery; the
Sixteenth was added to make it constitutional for
Congress to pass an income tax; and the Twentysixth was added to give the vote to eighteen-year-olds
in state elections.
On over thirty occasions Congress has merely
repassed a law that the Court has declared unconstitutional. In one case a bill to aid farmer s, voided in
1936, was accepted by the Court in slightly revised
form three years later. 57 (In the meantime, of course,
the Court had changed its collective mind about the
New Dea l. )
One o[ the most powerful potential so urces of
co ntrol over the federal courts, however. is the
authority of Congress, given by the Constitution. to
decide what the entire jurisdiction of the lower

461

462

Chapter 16

TIle Judiciary

Judicial Review in Canada and Europe
Courts outside the United States can declare laws to
be unconstitutional, but most can do so in ways that
are very different from that in the United States.
Canada: The highest court can declare a law
unconstitutional, but not if the legislature has
passed it with a special provision that says the law
will survive judicial scrutiny notwithstanding the
country's Charter of Rights. Such laws must be
renewed every five years.
Europe: The European Court of Human Rights
in Strasbourg can decide human rights cases that
begin in any of the nations that make up the European Community.

courts and the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court shall be. In theory Cong ress co uld prevent
matters on which it did not want federal cou rts to act
from ever coming before the courts. This happened in
1868. A Mississippi newspaper editor named McCar-

Thurgood Marshall became the jirst Black Supreme Court Justice.
As cllieJ council Jar the NAACp, Marshall argued the 1954
Brown v. Board of Education case in Jront oj the Supreme Cou rt.
He was appoillted to the Cou rt in 1967 and served until 1991.

France: Its Constitutional Council can declare a
law unconstitutional, but only if asked to do so by
government officials and only before (not after) the
law goes into effect.
Germany: The Federal Constitutional Court
can declare in an advisory opinion, before a case
has emerged, that a law is unconstitutional , and it
can judge the constitutionality of laws when asked
to do so by a lower court (which itself cannot rule
a law unconstitutional). The Federal Constitutional Court may hold an administrative or judicial
action to be unj ustified when a citizen, having
exhausted all other remedies, fil es a petition.

die was jailed by federal military authorities who
occupied the defeated South. McCardle asked the federal district court for a writ of habeas corpus to get
him out of custody; when the district court rejected
his plea. he appealed to the Supreme Court. Congress
at that time was fearful that the Court might find the
laws on which its Reconstruction policy was based
(and under which McCardle was in jail) unconstitutional. To prevent that from happening, it passed a
bill withdrawing from the Supreme Co urt appellate
jurisdiction in cases of this sort. The Co urt conceded
that Congress could do this and thus dismissed the
case beca use it no longer had jurisdiction.58
Congress has threatened to withdraw jurisdiction
on other occasions, and the mere existence of the
threat may have in1luenced the nature of Court decisions. In the 19 50s, for example. congressional opinion
was hostile to Court decisions in the field of civilliberties and civil rights. and legislation was proposed that
would have curtailed the Court's jurisdiction in these
areas. It did not pass, but the Court may have allowed
the threat to temper its decisions.59 On the other hand,
as congressional resistance to the Roosevelt Courtpacking plan shows, the Supreme Court enjoys a good
deal of prestige in the nation, even among people who
disagree with some of its decisions, and so passing laws
that would frontally attack it would not be easy except
perhaps in times of national crisis.
Furthermore, laws narrowing jurisdiction or
restricting the kinds of remedies that a court can
impose are often blunt instruments that might not

Chec1(s on Judicial Power
achieve the purposes of their proponents. Suppose
that you, as a member of Congress, would like to prevent the federal courts from ordering schoolchildren
to be bused for the purpose of ach ieving racia l balance in the schools. If you denied the Supreme Court
appellate jurisdiction in this matter, you would leave
the lower federal courts and all state courts free to do
as they wished , and many of them would go on
ordering busing. If you wanted to attack that problem. you cou ld propose a law that would deny to all
federal courts the right to order busing as a remedy
for racial imbalance. But the courts would still be free
to order busing (and of course a lot of busing goes on
even without court orders), provided that they did
not say that it was for the purpose of achieving racial
balance. (It could be for the purpose of "facilitating
desegregation" or making possible "red istricting. ")
Natura lly you could always make it illegal for children to enter a school bus for any reason. but then
many chi ldren would not be able to get to school at
all. Fina lly, the Supreme Court might well decide that
if busing were essential to achieve a constitutional
right, then any congressional law prohibiting such
busing wou ld itself be unconstitutional. Trying to
th ink through how that dilemma would be resolved is
like tryin g to visualize two kangaroos simultaneously jumping into each other's pouches.

Public Opinion and the Courts
Though they are not elected, judges read the same
newspapers as members of Congress, and thus they.
too, are aware of public opinion. especially elite opinion. Thou gh it may be goin g too far to say that the
Supreme Court follows the election returns, it is
nonetheless true that the Court is sensitive to certain
bodies of opin ion. especially of those eli tes- libera l
or conservative- to which its members happen to be
attuned . The justices will keep in mind historical
cases in which their predecessors, by blatantly disregarding public opinion, very nearly destroyed the
legitimacy of the Court itself. This was the case with
the Dred Scott decision. which infuriated the orth
and was widely disobeyed. No such crisis exists
today, but it is altogether possible that changing
political moods affect the kinds of remedies that
judges will think appropriate.
Opinion not only restrains the courts; it may also
energize them. The most activist periods in Supreme
Court history have coincided with times when the
political system was undergoing profound and lasting changes. The assertion by the Supreme Court,

under John Marshall's leadership, of the principles of
national supremacy and judicial review occurred at
the time when the Jeffersonian Republicans were
coming to power and their opponents, the Federalists, were co ll apsing as an organized party. The
pros lavery decisions of the Taney Court came when
the nation was so divided along sectional and ideological lines as to make almost any Court decision on
this matter unpopular. Supreme Court review of economic regulation in the 1890s and 1900s came at a
time when the political parties were realigning and
the Republicans were acqu iring dominance that
wou ld last for severa l decades. The Court decisions of
the 1930s corresponded to another period of partisan rea lignment. (The meaning of a realign in g election was discussed in Chapter 10.)
Pollsters have been measuring how much confidence the public has in the Supreme Court. The
results are shown in Figure 16.3. The percentage of
people saying that they had a "great deal of confidence" in the Court rose sharply from 1971 to 1974.
fell again until 1976, seesawed up and down until
1989, took a sharp dip and then recovered from
1989 to 1991, and aga in seesawed before rising in
1996. These movements seem to refl ect the public's
reaction not on ly to what the Court does but also to
what the government as a whole is doing. The
upturn in the early 1970s was probably caused by
the Watergate scandal, an episode that simultaneous ly discredited the presidency and boosted the
stock of those in stitutions (such as the courts) that
seemed to be checking the abuses of the White
House. The gradual upturn in the 1980s may have
re!1ected a general restoration of public confidence in
government during that decade. 6o
Though popular support is now relatively low for
the Supreme Court. this decline has so far not resulted in any legal checks being placed on it. In the
1970s and 1980s several bills were introduced in
Congress that would have restricted the jurisdiction
of federal courts over busing for purposes of racial
integration or altered the Supreme Court's decisions
regarding school prayer and abortion. None passed.
The changes that have occurred in the Court have
been caused by changes in its personnel. Presidents
ixon and Reagan attempted to produce a less activist
Court by appointing justices who were more inclined
to be strict constructionists and conservatives. To
some extent they succeeded: Justices Kennedy. O'Connor. Rehnquist. and Scalia were certainly less inclined
than Justice Thurgood Marshall to find new rights in

463

464

Chapter 16

Figure 16.3

The Judiciary

Patterns of Public Confidence in the Court. 1974-2003

60
-Cl>

u
c:

55

Cl>

"0

~

50

0

u

ro

Cl>

::M 45
OJ)

c:
·in
<n
Cl>

Q.

40

x

Cl>
Cl>

OJ)

~
c:
Cl>
u

Q;

(L

35

30

1973

1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

Source: The Gallup Poll.

the Constitution or to overturn the decisions of sta te
legislatures. Bu t as of yet th ere has been no wholesa le
retreat from the positions staked out by the Warren
Court. As noted above, a ixon appointee, Justice
Blackmun, wrote the decision making antiabortion
laws unconstitutional : a nd another Nixon appointee.
Chief Ju stice Burger. wrote the opinion upholding
court-ordered school busing to achieve racial integration. A Reagan appointee, Justice O'Connor, voted to
uphold a right to an abortion. The Supreme Co urt ha s
become somewhat less willing to impose restraints on
police practices, and it has not blocked the use of the
death penalty. But in general the maj or features of
Court activism and libera lism during th e Warren
years-school integration, sharper limits on police
practice, greater freedom o[ ex press ion- h ave
remained intact.
The reasons for the growth in court activism are
clea r. One is the sheer growth in the size and scope of

*
A

the government as a whole. The courts have come to
playa larger role in our lives because Congress, the
bureaucracy. and the president h ave come to play
larger ones. In 1890 hardly anybody would have
thought of asking Congress- much less the courtsto make rul es governin g the participation of women
in college sports or the district boundaries of state legislatures. Today such ru les are commonplace. a nd the
co urts are in ev itably drawn into interpreting them.
And when the Court decided how the vote in Florida
would be counted during the 2000 presidential election, it created an opportunity in the future for scores
of new lawsuits challenging election res ults.
The olher reason for increased activism is the
acceptance by a large number of judges, co nservative as well as libera l, of the activist view of the function of the co urts. If courts once existed solely to
"settle disputes. " today they also exist in the eyes of
their members to Hsolve problems. "

SUMMARY

n independent judicia ry with the power of judicial rev iew-the right to decide the constitutionality o[ acts of Congress, the executive branch, and
state governments-can be a potent politica l force in
America n life. Th at influence has been rea lized [rom

the earliest days o[ th e nati on. when Marsha ll a nd
Ta ney put the Supreme Co urt at the center o[ the
most important issues of the time. From 1 787 to
1865 the Supreme Court was preoccupied with the
establishment o[ national supremacy. From 1865 to

Su mmary

19 37 it struggled with defining the scope of political
power over the economy. In the present era it has
sought to expand personal liberties.
The scope of the courts' poli tical influence has
increasingly widened as various groups and interests
have acquired access to the courts, as the judges
serving on them have developed a more activist
sta nce, and as Congress has passed more laws conta ining vague or equivocal language. Whereas in
other political arenas (the electorate, Co ngress, the
burea ucracy) the influence of contendin g groups is
largely dependent on their size, intensity, prestige,
and political resources , the influence of contend in g
groups before the courts depends chiefly on their
arguments and the attitudes of the judges.
Though the Supreme Court is the pinnacle of the
federa l judiciary. most decisions, including many
importa nt ones. are made by the twelve courts of

appea ls and the ninety-four distri ct courts. The
Supreme Co urt can co ntrol its ow n workloa d by
deciding when to grant certiorari. It has become easier for citizens a nd groups to gain access to the fed eral courts (through class-action suits, by amicLis
cLiriae briefs. by laws that require government agencies to pay legal fees, and because of the activities of
private groups such as the NAACP a nd the ACLU).
At the same time. the courts have widened the
reach of th eir decisions by issuing orders that cover
whole classes of citizens or affect the management of
maj or public and private institutions. However, the
courts can overstep the bounds of their authority
and bring upon themselves a co unterattack from
both the public and Congress. Congress has tbe right
to contro l much of tbe co urts' jurisdiction, but it
rarely does so. As a result the ab ility of judges to
make law is on ly infrequently cha ll enged directly.

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?
1. Why should federal judges serve for life?
Strictly speaking, they serve during "good behavior, "
but th at mea ns they wou ld have to be impeached and
convicted in order to remove them. The reason for
this protection is clear: The judiciary cannot be inde-

pendent of the other two branches of government if
judges co uld be easily removed by the pres ident or
Congress, a nd this independen ce ensures that they
are a separate bra nch of government.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. Why should federal courts be able to declare
laws unconstitutiol1al?
Though the Constitution does not explicitly give them
that power, they have acquired it on th e reasonable
assumption that the Constitution would become
meaningless if the president a nd Congress could
ignore its provisions. The Constitution, after a li , states
that it shall be the "supreme law of the land."
2. Should federal judges only interpret existil1g
laws or should they iJC able to create l1ew laws?
The federal courts rarely think that their decisions
create entirely new laws. but in fa ct their interpretations sometimes come close to just that. One reason

is that many prOVISIOns of the Co nstitution are
vague. What does the Constitution mea n by "respecting an establishment of religion," the "equal protection of the law," or a "cruel and unusual
punishm ent"? The courts must give concrete meaning to these phrases. But another reason is the persona l ideo logy of judges. Some tb ink th at a free press
is more important than laws governing ca mpaign
finance. while others think that a free press mu st give
way to such laws. Some believe that the courts ough t
to use federal law to strike down di scrimination, but
others think that affirmative action programs must
be put in place.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

Federal Judicia l Center: www.fjc.gov
Federal courts: www.uscourts.gov

Supreme Court decision s: www.law.comell.edu
Find in g laws and reports: www.findlaw.com

465

4 66

Cllapter 16

Tile Judiciary

SUGGESTED READINGS
Abraham, Henry J, '/'lIe Judi cial Process, 7th eel. Ne w York: Ox lord
University Press, 199 8, An excel lent. comprehensive sur vey of
how the federal courts are orga nized a nd fun ction,
Abraham, [-le nry J.. a nd Ba rba ra A, Perry, Freedolll oj the Court.
8 th ed, Lawrence, KS: Un iversity of Ka nsas Press , 2003, Careful summary of civil liberti es and c ivi l ri ghts cases ,
Ca rdozo, Benj a min N, Th e Natllre oJ the Judi cial Process , New
Haven, Co nn, : Ya le Un iversity Press, '1921. rmportant statement of how judges make deci sion s, by a former Supreme
Court justice,
Ely. Jobn Ha rt. Democrac!I alld Distrust. Cambridge: Harvard Univers ity Press. 1980. Effort to create a theory of jud icia l review
t ha t is neith er strict-constructionist nor activist.
Ha ll. Kermit L.. cd . Til e O.\}ord COI llpallioll to tile SlIprelll e Co urt oJ
the V IIi ted States. New York: Oxfo rd University Press. 1 992 .
Everythin g you ever wanted to know about the Supreme
Co urt. its justices. a nd its maj or dec isions. arranged in more
than one thou sa nd a lphabetica l entri es.
La sser. Wi ll ia m. Th e Lilllits oj JlIdicial Po\Ver. Chapel Hill : University of North Caro li na Press. 1988. Shows how the Court

through h istory has with stood th e politica l storm s crea ted by
its more co ntrovers ial decisions.
La~aru s . Edward. Closed Chllllllier.
ew York: Times Books. 19 98.
An eyewitn ess acco unt of how the Supreme Co urt opera tes.
Written by a form er law clerk. it is filled with both interestin g
facts a nd persona l opinions.
McCloskey. Robert C. The AllleriC!lIl SlIprenle COllrt. 4 th cd . Edited
by Sanford Lev inson. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
2 005. Superb brief histo ry of the Supre me Court. updated by
o ne o f McCloskey's form er students who now teach es law at
the Uni versity of Texas.
Rabkin. Jeremy. Jlldicial COIllPlllsiollS. New York: Bas ic Books.
1 989. Exp lain s (and arg ues again st) the ex tens ive Cou rt intervention in th e work of administrative agencies.
Wolfe, Chri stoph er. Th e !lise oJ Modem Jlldicial Revie\V. New York:
Bas ic Books. ] 980 . An excellent hi story of judicial review
fro m 1 787 to th e present.

In the extended republic of the United
States, and among the great variety of
interests, partie, and sects which it
embraces, a coalition of a majority of the
whole society could seldom take place on
any other prin iples than those ofjustice
and the general good.
FEDERALIST

No. 51

CHAPTER

17

The Policy-Making Process

Setting the Agenda
The Legitimate Scope of Government
Action • Action by the States

Making a Decision
Majoritarian Politics: Distributed
Benefits, Distributed Costs
Interest Group Politics: Concentrated
Benefits, Concentrated Costs
Client Politics: Concentrated Benefits,
Distributed Costs

Entrepreneurial Politics: Distributed
Benefits, Concentrated Costs
The Case of Business Regulation
Majoritarian Politics • Interest Group
Politics • Client Politics •
Entrepreneurial Politics

Perceptions, Beliefs, Interests,
and Values
Deregulation •

The Limits of Ideas

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

2.

Does some political elite dominate
Amer ican politics ?
Do powerful interest groups deci de
what policies our government
should adopt?

2.

Why are Social Security payments
popular but welfare payments to
unwed mothers unpopular?
Why were government regulations
on certain industries repealed over
the objection of those industri es?

I

f all you wanted to know about Ameri can poli tics is how our leaders are
chosen a nd the ways in which they operate. you co uld close this book
now. But if you are interested in how our pub lic poli cies get made, you
should keep read ing because not all poli cies are made the sa me way.
Of co urse, some people claim that big business, or top burea ucrats, or
powerfu l interest groups decide everything. But th e Ma rxist. the Weberian,
and the pluralist views are only partially correct.
Co nsider some outcomes that need to be explained if we a re to understa nd the political influence wielded by just one kind of institution- the business corporation. Certain oil compa nies were once ab le to persuade the
government to restrict shar ply the a mount of foreign oil imported into the
United States, to give them preferential tax treatment, a nd to permi t them
to drill for new oil just about a nywhere they liked. Tod ay the restri cti ons on
foreign oil imports have ended, the tax breaks the oil compa nies enj oy have
been redu ced considerably (though they still exist), a nd their freedom to
drill in certain places, par ticularly offshore locations, h as been restricted.
Automobile ma nufacturers once faced virtually no federal controls on
the products they ma nufactured; now they fa ce many. In the past some corporations have been regulated in ways th at h ave increased their profitability (the airlines), reduced it (the railroads), or had no appreciable effect one
way or the other (electric utili ties). These outcomes of government action or
inaction a re complicated. To understa nd why they ha ppen, we need some
theory of policy-making. This chapter will prov ide one; subsequent chapters will apply it.

*

Setting the Agenda

The most important decision that affects policy-making is also the least
noticed one: decidin g what to make policy about, or in the la nguage of politica l science, deciding what belongs on the political agenda. We ta ke for
granted that poli tics is about certain familiar issues such as taxes, energy,
welfa re. a nd civil rights. We forget th at there is nothing inevitabl e about
having these iss ues- rather than so me other ones- on th e nation 's agenda. At one tim e it was unco nstitutiona l for the federa l government to levy
income taxes; energy was a nonissue because everybody (or at least everybody who co uld chop down trees for a fireplace) h ad enough; welfa re was
something for cities a nd towns to handle; and civil righ ts were supposed to

469

4 70

Chapter 17

The Policy-Ma ldl19 Process

be a matter of private choice rather than government
action. Until the 1930s the national political agenda
was quite short, and even in the 1950s many people
wou ld have been astonished or upset to be told that
the federa l government was supposed to worry about
the environment, consumerism. or civi l rights.
"He who decides what politics is about runs the
country."l This is a statement of profound significance, though it exaggerates the extent to which
somebody-some person-actually "decides" what
politics is all about. The statement correctly suggests
that at any given time certain shared beliefs determine what is legitimate (proper. rig ht) for the government to do. This legitimacy is affected by several
forces:
• Shared poli tica l va lues- for example, if many
people believe that poverty is the result of individual failure rather than social forces. then there is
no reason for a government program to combat
poverty.
• The weight of custom and tradition- people wi ll
usua lly accept what the government has customarily done, even if they are leery of what it proposes to do.
• The impact of events-wars. depreSSions. and
the li ke alter our sense of the proper ro le of
government.
• Changes in the way political elites think and talk
about politics.

The Legitimate Scope of
Government Action
Because many people believe that whatever the government now does it ought to continue doing, and
because changes in attitudes and the impact of
events tend to increase the number of things that
government does. the scope of legitimate government action is always getting larger. As a result the
scope of what is illegitimate for the government to do
steadily gets smaller. This means that today we hear
far fewer debates about the legitimacy of a proposed
government policy than we heard in the 1920s or
the 1930s. The existence of "big government" is sustained by these expanded beliefs about legitimacy

political agenda Issues that people believe
require governmental action .

and is not the consequence of some sinister power
grab by politicians or bureaucrats. When President
Gera ld Ford. a Republican, ran for election in 1976.
a favorite slogan of his was that a government big
enough to give you everything you want is also big
enough to take away everything you have. No doubt
he thought that he was criticizing libera l Democrats.
But it was his immediate predecessor. President
Nixon. also a Repub lican. who had imposed peacetime wage and price controls and proposed a guaranteed annual income for every fami ly. working or
not working. It was another Republi can president.
Dwight Eisen hower. who had sent federa l troops to
Little Rock . Arkansas. to enforce a school-desegregation order. And it was yet another Republican president. Rona ld Reagan. who was in office when federal
payments to farmers grew to be six times larger th an
they had been in the 19 70s. For better or worse. the
expansion of government has been the resu lt. fundamentally. of a nonpartisan process.
Popular views on the legitimate scope of government action. and thus on the kinds of issues that
ought to be on the political agenda. are changed by
the impact of events. During wartime or after a terrorist attack on this country. the people expect the
government to do whatever is necessary to win.
whether or not such actions are clearly authorized
by the Constitution. (As we saw in Chapter 15 . the
federal bureaucracy enjoys its most rapid growth in
wartime.) A depression. such as the one that began
in 1929. also leads people to expect the government
to do something. As we shall see in Chapter 19. public opinion favored federa l action to deal with the
problems of the unemployed. the elderly. and the poor
well in advance of the actua l decisions of the government to take action. A coal mine disaster leads to an
en larged role for the government in promoting mine
safety. A series of airplane hijackings leads to a
change in public opinion so great that what once
would have been unthinkable- requiring all passengers at airports to be searched before boarding their
flights- becomes routine.
But sometimes the government enlarges its agenda of policy issues. often dramatically. withou t any
crisis or widespread public demand. Th is may happen even at a time when the conditions at which a
po licy is directed are improving. There was no public
demand for government action to make automobi les
safer before 1966, when a law was passed imposing
safety standards on cars. Though the number of

Setting the Agenda

September 11, 2001, known ever after as 9/11, had a powe/jui eJJect on the agenda of American
politics. This photo was taken one year after the disastc/:

auto fatalities (per 100 million miles driven ) had
gone up slightly just be[ore the law was passed, the
long-term trend in hi ghway deaths had been more or
less stead ily downward. The Occupational Safety and
Health Act was passed in 1970 at a time when the
number of industri al deaths (per 100,000 workers)
had been steadily dropping for almost twenty years.2
Programs to combat urban poverty and unemployment were adopted in the mid-1 960s at a time when
the number of persons, black as well as white, livin g
below the poverty line was declining and when the
adult unemployment rate-for blacks as well as
whites-was lower than it had been at any time in
the preceding ten years. 3 Affirmative action progra ms were introduced to increase the flow of
minoriti es into jobs and colleges at a time when
minorities were already making rapid progress.
It is not easy to explain why the government adds
new issues to its agenda and adopts new programs
when there is li ttle public demand and when, in fact ,
there has been an improvement in the conditions to
which the policies are addressed . In general the
explan ation may be found in the behav ior of groups,
the workings of institutions, the opinions of political
elites, and the action of state governments.

• Groups Many policies are the result of small
groups of people enlargin g the scope of government
by their demands. Sometimes these are organized
interests (for example, corporations or unions);
sometimes they are intense but unorga nized groups
(urban minorities) . The organized gro ups often work
quietly, behind the scenes; the intense, unorganized
ones may take their causes to the streets.
Organized labor favored a tough federal safety
law governing factories and other workplaces not
because it was unaware that factory conditions had
been improving but because the standards by which
union leaders and members judged working conditions had risen even faster. As people became better
off, conditions that once were thought normal suddenly became intolerable. When Alex is de Tocqueville sought to explain the French Revolution, he
observed that citizens are most restl ess and easily
aroused not when they are living in abject poverty or
under grinding repression but when they have started to become better off. 4 Social scientists sometimes
refer to this as a sense of "relative deprivation."
On occasion a group expresses in violent ways its
dissatisfaction with what it judges to be intolerable
conditions. The black riots in America n cities during

471

472

Chapter 17

The Policy-Making Process

the mid-1960s had a variety of causes, and people
participated out of a variety of motives. For many.
rioting was a way of expressing pent-up anger at
what they regarded as an unresponsive and unfair
society. This sense of relative deprivation- of being
worse off than one thinks one ought to be- helps
explain why so large a proportion of the rioters were
not uneducated , unemployed recent migra nts to the
city, but rather young men and women born in the
orth, educated in its schools, and emp loyed in its
factories. 5 Life under these conditions turned out to
be not what they had come to expect or what they
were prepared to tolerate.
The new demands of such groups need not res ult
in an enlarged political agenda. and they do not
when society and its governing institutions are confident of the rightness of the existing state of affairs.
Unions could have been voted down on the occupational safety bill; rioti ng blacks co u ld have been jailed
and ignored. At one time exactly this would have
happened. But society itself had changed: many
people who were not workers sympathized with the
plight of the injured worker and distrusted the good
intentions of business in this matter. Many whites
felt that a co nstructive as well as a punitive response
to the urban riots was required and thus urged the
formation of commissions to study- and the passage
of laws to deal with- the problems of inner-city life.
Such changes in the values and beliefs of people
generally-or at least of people in key govern ment
positions-are an essential part of any explanation
of why policies not demanded by public op inion
nonetheless beco me part of the political agenda.
Institutions Among the instituti ons whose
influence on agenda-setting has beco me especially
important are the courts, the bureaucracy, and the
Senate.
The courts can make decision s that force the hand
of the other branches of government. When in 1954
the Supreme Court ordered schools desegregated ,
Congress and the White House could no longer
ignore the issue. Loca l resistance to impl ementing
the order led President Eisenhower to send troops to
Little Rock. Arkansas. despite his dislike for using
force again st local governments. When the Supreme
Co urt ruled in 1973 that the states cou ld not ban
abortions during the first trimester of pregnancy,
abortion suddenly beca me a national political issue.
Right-to- life activists ca mpaigned to reverse the

•

Court decis ion or, failing that, to prevent federal
funds from bein g used to pay for abortions. Prochoice activi sts [ought to prevent the Court from
changing its mind and to get federal funding [or
abortions. In these and many other cases the courts
act like tripwires: when activated, they set off a chain
reaction of events that alters the political agenda and
crea tes a new constellation o[ political forces.
Indeed. they are more than tripwires. As the government agenda has expanded, the co urts have
beco me the favorite method for doin g things for
which there is no popular majority. There may be no
electora l support for allowing abortion on demand,
eliminating sc hool prayer. creating affirmative
action, ordering school busing. or attacking tobacco
companies, but in the courts elections do not matter.
The courts are the preferred vehicles [or the advocates of unpopular causes.
The bureaucracy has acquired a new Significance
in American politics not simply because of its size or
power but a lso because it is now a source of political
innovation. At one time the federal government
reacted to events in society and to demands from segments of society ; ordinarily it did not itself propose
changes and new ideas. Today the bureaucracy is so
large, and includes w ithin it so great a variety of
experts and advocates, that it has become a so urce of
policy proposa ls as well as an implementer of those
that become law. Daniel Patrick Moynihan ca lled
this the "professionalization of reform," by which he
mea nt, in part. that the government bureaucracy
had begun to think up prob lems for government to
so lve rather than simply to respond to the problems
id entified by others. 6 In the 19 30s many of the key
elements of the ew Deal- Social Security, unemployment compensation, public housing, old-age
benefits- were id eas devis ed by nongovernment
experts and intell ectuals here and abroad and then.
as the crisis of the depression deepened , taken up by
the federal government. In the 1960s, by contrast,
most of the measures that became known as part of
Lyndon Johnson 's "Great Society"-federal aid to
edu ca tion , manpower development and training,
Med icare and Medicaid . the "Wa r on Pover ty," the
"sa fe-streets" act providing fed era l aid to loca l law
enforcement agencies-were developed, designed,
and advocated by government officials, bureaucrats,
and their political allies.
Chief among these political allies a re U. S. senators
and their staffs. Once the Senate was best described

Making a Decision
as a club that moved slowly, debated endlessly, and
resisted, under the leadership of conservative southern Democrats, the pla ns of liberal presidents. With
the co llapse of the one-party South and the increase
in the number of liberal activist senators, the Senate
became in the 1960s a n incubator for developing
n ew policies and building national constituencies. 7
As the Senate became more conservative in the
19 80s, it reta ined the initiative, but now on behalf of
reversing some of the changes wrought ea rlier. The
Senate has thus become one of the sources of politica l change rather than, as the Founders in tended, a
bala nce wheel designed to moderate change. s
Media The national press ca n either help pl ace
new matters on the agenda or publicize those matters placed there by others. There was a close correlation between the po litical attention given in the
Senate to proposals for new safety sta ndards for
industry, coal mines, and auto mobiles a nd the
amount of space devoted to these questions in the
pages of the New York Times. Newspaper interest in
the matter. low before the issue was placed on the
agenda, peaked at about the time that the bill was
passed. 9 It is hard, of course, to decide which is cause
and which effect. The press may have stimulated
congressional interest in the matter or merely reported on what Co ngress had already decided to pursue.
onetheless, the press must choose which of thousands of proposals it will cover. The beliefs of editors
and reporters led it to select the safety issue. In later
chapters we shall discuss the kinds of issues for
which the national press is important.
In sh ort. the political agenda can change because
of changes in popular attitudes, elite in terest, critica l
events, or government actions. An overly simple but
esse ntially cor rect generalization might be this:
popular attitudes usually change slowly. often in
response to criti cal events: eli te attitudes a nd government actions are more volatile and interdependent
and thus change more quickly, often in response to
each other.

•

Action by the States
National policy is increasingly being made by the
actions of state governments. You may wonder how.
After all, a state can only pass laws that affect its own
people. Of co urse, the national government may
later adopt ideas pioneered in the states, as it did
when Congress passed a "Do Not Ca ll " law to reduce

how many phone calls you will get from salespeople
while you are trying to eat dinner. The states had
taken the lead in this.
But there is another way in which state governments can make national policy directly without Congress ever voting on the matter. The attorneys general
of states may sue a business firm and settle the suit
with an agreement that binds the industry throughout the country. The effect of that suit may be to raise
prices for consumers and create a new set of regulations. This is what happened in 1998 with the tobacco
agreement negotiated hetween cigarette companies
and some state attorneys genera l. The companies
agreed to raise their prices, pay more tha n $240 billion to state governments (to use as they wished) and
several billion doll ars to private lawyers, and to agree
to a massive regulatory program.

*

Making a Decision

Once a n issue is on the political agenda. its nature
affects the kind of politicking that ensues. Some
issues provoke intense interest group conflict; others
all ow one group to preva il almost unchallenged.
Some issues involve ideo logical appeals to broad
national constituencies; others involve quiet bargaining in co ngress ional offices. We all know that private
groups try to influence government policies; we often
forget that the nature of the issues with which government is dea ling influences the kinds of groups
that become politically active.
One way to understa nd how a n issue affects the
distribution of political power amo ng groups and
institutions is to examine what appear to be the costs
and benefits of the proposed policy. The cost is any
burden, moneta ry or nonmon etary, that some people
must bear, or th ink that they must bear. if the policy
is adopted. The costs of a government spend ing program are the taxes that it entails; the cost of a foreign
policy initiative may be the increased chance of having the nation drawn into war. The bene6t is any
satisfaction, monetary or nonmonetary, that people

cost

A burden that people believe they must
bear if a policy is enacted.
benefit A satisfaction that people believe they
will enjoy if a policy is adopted.

473

4 74

Chapter 17

Th e Policy-Ma l<il1g Process

Highwa!J safety was always a problem, but it became a l1ational issue after policy advocates, such
as Mothers Agail1st Drul1k Drivillg (MA DD), emphasized it.

believe they will enjoy if the poli cy is adopted. The
benefl ts of a government spending program are the
pay ments, subsidies, or contracts received by some
people; the benefits of a foreign policy initiative may
include the enha nced securi ty of the nation, the protection of a valued a Uy, or the vindica tion of some
importa nt principle such as human rights.
Two aspects of these costs a nd benefl ts should be
borne in mind. First, it is the perception of costs a nd
benefits that affects politics. People may think that
the cost of an auto emissions co ntrol system is paid
by the ma nufacturer, when it is actu ally passed on
to the consumer in the form of hi gher prices and
reduced performan ce. Political conflict over poll ution
co ntro l will take one fo rm when people think that
Ford and GM pay the costs a nd another form when
they th ink that the consumers pay.
Second , people take into acco unt not only who
benefits but also whether it is legitirnate for th at
group to benefit. When programs providing fin a ncial
assistance to women with dependent children were
first developed in the early part of this century, they
were relatively nonco ntroversial because peop le saw
the money as going to wid ows and orpha ns who
deserved such aid. La ter on giving aid to mothers
with depend ent children beca me co ntroversial

beca use some people now perceived the recipients
not as dese rving wid ows bu t as sex ua lly loose
women wh o had never married. Whatever the truth
of the matter. the program h ad lost some of its legitimacy beca use the beneficiaries were no longer seen
as "deserving." By the same token, groups once
thought undeser ving, such as men out of wor k, were
later thou ght to be entitled to aid , a nd thus the
un employment compensation program acquired a
legitimacy that it once lacked.
Po litics is in large measure a process of raising
a nd settling disputes over who will benefl t or pay for
a program a nd who ought to benefit or pay. Since
belief's about the results of a program a nd the rightness of those results are matters of opinion, it is ev ident that ideas are at least as importa nt as interests
in shaping politics, In recent yea rs ideas have become
especially importa nt with the rise of issues whose
co nsequ ences are la rgely inta ngib le, such as abortion, schoo l prayer, and racial integration.
Th ough perceptions about costs and benefi ts
chan ge, most people most of the time prefer government progra ms that provide substa ntial benefits to
th em at low cost. This rather obvious fact can have
important implication s for how politics is carried out.
In a political system based on some measure of pop-

Ma joritarian Po li tics: Distributed Benefits, Distributed Costs
ular rule, public officials have a strong incentive to
offer programs that confer-or appear to conferbeneflts on people with costs that are either small in
amount, remote in time, or borne by "somebody
else." Po licies that seem to impose high, immediate
costs in return ror small or remote benefits will be
avo ided , enacted with a minimum of publicity, or
proposed only in response to a rea l or apparent crisis.
Ordinarily no president wou ld propose a po licy
that would immediately raise the cost or fue l, even if
he were convinced that ruture supplies of oil and
gasoline were likely to be exhausted unless higher
prices reduced current consumption. But when a crisis occurs, such as the Arab oil cartel's price increases beginning in 19 73, it becomes possible for the
pres ident to offer such proposals-as did Nixon.
Ford, and Carter in varying ways. Even then, however, people are reluctant to bear increased costs, and
thus many are led to dispute the president's claim
that an emergency actually exists.
These entirely hu man responses to the perceived
costs and benefits of proposed policies can be organized into a simple theory of po li tics. 10 It is based on
the observation that the costs and benefits of a policy
may be widely distributed (spread over many, most, or
even all citizens) or narrowly concentrated (limited to a
relatively small n umber of citizens or to some identi fi able, organized group) . For instance, a widely distributed cost would include an income tax, a Social
Security tax, or a high rate of crime; a widely distributed beneflt might include retirement benefi ts for all
citizens, clean air, national security, or low crime
rates. Examp les of narrow ly concentrated costs
include the expenditures by a factory to reduce its pollution, government regulations imposed on doctors
and hospitals participating in the Medicare program,
or restrictions on freedom of speech imposed on a
dissident political group. Examples of narrowly concentrated benefits include su bsid ies to farmers or
merchant ship compan ies, the enlarged freedom to
speak and protest afforded a dissident group, or protection aga inst competition given to an industry
because of favorable government regulation.
The perceived distribution of costs and benefits
shapes the kinds oj political coalitions that will jormbut it will not necessa rily determine who wins. A
given popular majority. interest group, cl ient. or
entrepreneur may win or lose depending on its infl uence and the temper of the times.

In the remainder of this chapter we shall describe
the polities of four kinds of poli cies and then illustrate each kind with examples drawn from government efforts to regulate business.

*

Majoritarian Politics:
Distributed Benefits,
Distributed Costs
Some policies promise beneflts to large numbers of
people at a cost that large numbers of people wi ll
have to bear (see Figure 17.1). For example, almost
everybody will sooner or later receive Social Security
benefits, and almost everybody who works has to pay
Social Security taxes. Simil arly. defending the nation
aga inst military attack benefits everyone. and every
taxpayer contributes to its cost. If government-sponsored research to find cures for cancer and heart disease is successful, a large proportion of the citizenry
will benefit from a program that all taxpayers have
been obliged to support.
Such majoritaria n politics are usually not dominated by pull ing and hauling among riva l interest
groups; instead they invo lve making appea ls to large
blocs of voters and their representatives in hopes of
finding a majority. The reason why interest groups
are not so important in majoritarian politics is that,
as we saw in Chapter 11. citizens rarely wi ll have
much incentive to join an interest group if the policy
that such a group supports will benefit everybody,
whether or not they are members of the group. This
is the "free-rider" prob lem. Why join the Committee
to Increase (or Decrease) the Defense Budget when
what you personally contribute to that committee
makes little difference in the outcome and when you
will enjoy the benefits of more (or less) national
defense even if you have stayed on the sideli nes?
Majoritarian politics may be controversia l, but the
controversy is usually over matters of cost or ideology. not between rival interest groups. When Congress
passed three laws to reduce drug use. this was a
majoritarian issue (that is, there were no interest

majoritarian politics A policy in which almost
everybody benefits and almost everybody pays.

4 75

4 76

Cltapter 17

Figure 17.1

Tlte Policy-Making Process

A Way of Classifying and Explaining the Politics of Different Policy Issues
PERCEIVED COSTS
Distributed

Concentrated

Majoritarian Politics

Entrepreneurial Politics

""0

2:::J

en

'w=

E

w

0

.0

lJ...

z

If)

(l)

0

W

""0

2:

Q)

u

~c

CL

u

w

a::
w

Interest Group Politics

Q)

c
0

U

groups active on behalf of drug dealers). The arguments were over matters such as the desirability of
the death penalty for big traffickers. The military
budget went up during the early 1980s, down in the
late 1980s, and up again after 2001; the changes
reflected different views on how much we shou ld
spend and the relationship between mil itary spending and arms-control negotiations.

"*

Interest Group Politics:
Concentrated Benefits,
Concentrated Costs

Issues of this kind tend to be fought out by organized
interest groups. Each side will be so powerfully affected
by the outcome that it has a strong incentive to mobilize; union members who worry about layoffs will have
a personal stake in favoring the notice bill: business
leaders who fear government control of investment
decisions will have an economic stake in opposing it.
Interest group politics often produces decisions
about which the public is uninformed. The bitter
debates between television broadcasters and cable
compan ies over who may send what kind of signals to

In in terest group poli tics, a proposed policy will
confer benefits on some relatively small, identifiable
group and impose costs on another small. equally
identifiable group. For example, when Congress
passed a bill requiring companies to give sixty days'
notice of a plant closing or a large-scale layoff. labor
unions (whose members would benefit) backed the
bill , and many business firms (which would pay the
costs) opposed it.

interest group politics

A policy in which one
small group benefits and another small group
pays.

Majoritarian politicS: Widespread bankJailures in the
1930s helped palle the way Jar Jaws regulating and insuring financial institutions.

Clien t Politics: Concentrated Benefits, Distributed Costs
which homes hard ly draws any pub lic notice-until
after a law is passed and people can see what their
cable charges will be. Similarly, the long struggle to
give banks the right to sell insurance involved not the
pub lic, but banks and insurance companies. In time
the public will discover whether they like the results.
Though many issues of this type invo lve monetary costs and benefits, they can also involve intangible considerations. If the American Nazi party wants
to march through a predominantly Jewish neighborhood carrying flags with swastikas on them, the
community may organize itself to resist out of revulsion against the disgraceful treatment of Jews by
Nazi Germany. Each side may hire lawyers to debate
the issue before the city council and in the courts.

*

Client Politics: Concentrated
Benefits, Distributed Costs
With clien t politics some identifiable, often small
group will benefit, but everybody-or at least a large
part of society-will pay the costs. Because the benefits are concentrated, the group that is to receive
those benefits has an incentive to organize and work
to get them. But because the costs are widely distributed, affecting many people only sligh tly, those who
pay the costs may be either unaware of any costs or
ind ifferent to them, because per capita they are so
sma ll.
This situation gives rise to client politics (sometimes ca ll ed cl ientele politics); the beneficiary of the
po licy is the "client" of the government. For example,
many farmers benefit substantially from agricu ltura l
pr ice supports, but the far more numerous food consumers have no idea what these price supports cost
them in taxes and higher food prices. In the same
way, airlines for a long time benefited fl"om the h igher prices that they were able to charge on certain
routes as a result of government regu lations that
restricted competition over prices. But the average
passenger was either unaware that his or her costs
were higher or did not think that the higher prices
were worth making a fuss about.
Not all clients are economic interests. Localities
can also benefit as clients when, for example, a city or
county obtains a new dam, a better harbor, or an
improved irrigation system. Some of these projects

Texas high school students protest against smoking duri ng an
event sponsored by ']'eens Against Tobacco Use, a peer-based
tobacco use preventioll program.

may be worthwhile, others may not; by custom,
however, they are referred to as pork-barrel projects.
Usu ally several pieces of "pork" are put into one barrel-that is, several projects are approved in a single
piece of pork-barrel le gi s lation , such as the
"rivers and harbors" bill that Congress passes almost
every year. Trading votes in this way attracts the support of members of Congress from each affected
area; with enough projects a majority coalition is
formed. This process is called logrolling.
Not every group that wants something from government at little cost to the average citizen will get it.
Welfare recipients cost the typical taxpayer a small
amount each year, yet there was great resistance to
increasing these benellts. The homeless have not
organized themselves to get benefits; indeed, most do
not even vote. Yet benefits are being provided (albeit
in modest amounts so far). These examples illustrate

client politics

A policy in which one small
group benefits and almost everybody pays.
pork-barrel legislation Legislation that gives
tangible benefits to constituents in several dis"
tricts or states in the hope of winning their
votes in return .

logrolling

A legislator supports a proposal
favored by another in return for support of his
or hers.

477

478

Chapter 17

The Policy-Making Process

*

Entrepreneurial Politics:
Distributed Benefits,
Concentrated Costs

A Superfund site in Hou ston, Texas, where iJacteria were used to
clean up harmful industrial waste.

the importance of popular views concerning the
legitimacy of client claims as a factor in determining
the success of client demands. As we shall see in
Chapter 19, welfare recipients have never enjoyed
much legitimacy in the public's eye, and so programs
to increase their benefits were hard to sell to Congress.
The plight of the homeless, on the other hand, has
aroused a good deal of sympathy and produced bipartisan agreement on a bill providing emergency aid.
Moreover, that agreement seems to have persisted.
By the same token, groups can lose legitimacy
that they once had. People who grow tobacco once
were supported simply because they were farmers.
and were thus seen as both "deserving" and politically important. But when people began worrying
about the health risks associated with using tobacco,
farmers who produce tobacco lost some legitimacy
compared to those who produce corn or cotton. As a
result it became harder to get votes for maintaining
tobacco price supports and easier to slap higher taxes
on cigarettes.

entrepreneurial politics

A policy in which
almost everybody benefits and a small group
pays the cost.
policy entrepreneurs Activists in or out of
government who pull together a political
majority on behalf of unorganized interests.

In e n trepre n e urial politics society as a whole or
some large part of it benefits from a policy that
imposes substantial costs on some small, identifiab le
segment of society. The antipollution and safety
requirements for automobiles were proposed as ways
of improving the health and well-being of all people
at the expense (at least initially) of automobile manufacturers. Similarly, Congress enacted the Brady
bill, which requires a background check on gun buyers before they can purchase a firearm.
It is remarkable that policies of this sort are ever
adopted, and in fact many are not. After all, the American political system creates many opportunities for
checking and blocking the actions of others. The
Founders deliberately arranged things so that it would
be difficult to pass a new law; a determined minority
therefore has an excellent chance of blocking a new
policy. And any organized group that fears the loss of
some privilege or the imposition of some burden will
become a very determined minority indeed. The opponent has every incentive to work hard; the large group
of prospective beneficiaries may be unconvinced of the
benefit or regard it as too small to be worth fighting for.
Nonetheless, po licies with distributed benefits and
concentrated costs are in fact adopted, and in recent
decades they have been adopted with increasing frequ ency. A key element in the adoption of such policies has been the work of people who act on behalf of
the unorganized or indifferent majority. Such people,
called policy e ntre pren e urs, are those both in and
out of government who find ways of pulling together
a legislative majority on behalf of interests that are
not well represented in the government.
These po licy entrepreneurs mayor may not represent the interests and wishes of the public at large,
but they do have the ability to dramatize an issue in a
convincing manner. Ralph Nader is perhaps the bestknown example of a policy entrepreneur, or as he
might describe himself, a "consumer advocate." But
there are other examples from both ends of the political spectrum, conservative as well as liberal.
Entrepreneurial politics can occur without the
leadership of a policy entrepreneur if voters or legis-

The Case of Business Regulation
lators in large numbers suddenly become disgruntled
by the high cost of some benellt that a group is
receiving (or become convinced of the urgent need
for a new policy to impose such costs). For example.
voters may not care about government programs
that benefit the oil industry when gaso line costs only
one dollar a gallon, but they might care very much
when the price rises to two dollars a gallon, even if
the government benefits had nothing to do with the
price increase. By the same token , legislators may
not worry much about the effects of smog in the air
until a lot of people develop burning eyes and runny
noses during an especially severe smog attack.
Likewise, most legislators did not worry very much
about toxic or hazardous wastes until 19 77, when the
Love Canal dump site near Buffalo, New York, spilled
some of its toxic waste into the backyards of an adjacent residential neighborhood and people were forced
to leave their homes. Five years later anyone who had
forgotten about Love Canal was reminded of it when
the town of Times Beach, Missouri, had to be permanently evacuated because it had become contaminated with the chemical dioxin. Only then did it become
widely known that there were more than thirty thousand toxic waste sites nationwide that posed public
safety risks. Although researchers have yet to find any
conclusive evidence of health damage at either site,
the Superfund program was born in 1980 of the
political pressure that developed in the wake of these
and other highly publicized tales of toxic waste dangers. Superfund was intended to force industries to
clean up their own toxic waste sites. It also authorized
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to act
speedily, with or without cooperation from industries,
in identifying and cleaning up any sites that posed a
large or imminent danger.
Superfund has suffered a number of political and
administrative problems, and only a few of the 1,300
sites initially targeted by the EPA have actually been
cleaned up since the program went into effect. l l
However, Superfund is a good illustration of entrepreneurial politics in action. Special taxes on once
largely unregulated oil and chemical companies
have funded the program. Previously these companies enjoyed special tax privileges as bene/1ciaries of
client politics; today they face special tax burdens as
the targets of entrepreneurial politics.
For many reasons-including the enlarged political role of the media, the decentralization of Congress, and a change in the attitudes of many

citizens-entrepreneurial politics has become more
common and policy entrepreneurs more visible in
recent decades.

The Case of Business
Regulation
Efforts by government to regulate business not only
illustrate these four kinds of policy-making processes, but also shed light on an issue that many people
think is central to the study of politics-namely, the
relationship between wealth and power.
To some observers the very existence of large corporations is a threat to popular rule. Economic power
will dominate political power, they believe, for one or
more of three reasons: /1rst, because wealth can be
used to buy influence; second , because politicians
and business leaders have similar class backgrounds
and thus similar beliefs about public policy; and
third , because elected ofl1cials must defer to the preferences of business so as to induce corporations to
keep the economy healthy and growing. Karl Marx,
of course, proposed the most sweeping version of the
view that economics controls politics; for him the
state in a capitalist society was nothing more than
the executive committee of the propertied classes. 12
But there are other non-Marxist or neo-Marxist versions of the same concern. 13
To other observers politics, far from being subordinate to economic power, is a threat to the very existence
of a market economy and the values-economic
growth, private property, personal freedom-that they
believe such an economy protects. In this view politicians will Ilnd it in their interest. in their struggle for
votes, to take the side of the nonbusiness majority
against that of the business minority. The heads of
large corporations, few in number but great in wealth,
fear that they will be portrayed as a sinister elite on
whom politicians can blame war, in!1ation, unemployment, and pollution. Defenders of business worry that
corporations will be taxed excessively to pay for social
programs that in turn will produce more votes for
politicians. Just as bad, in this view, is the tendency of
universities (on which corporations must rely for technical experts) to inculcate antibusiness values in their
students. 14
The theory of the policy-making process presented earlier in this chapter should suggest that neither

479

480

Chapter 17

The Policy-Making Process

of these two extreme views of business-government
relations is entirely correct. These relations depend
on many things , including the kind of policy being
proposed. Instead of clenching our fi sts and shoutin g
probusiness or antibusiness slogans at each other, we
sho uld be able, after applying this theory to the available facts, to make more careful and exact statements
of the following sort: "If certain conditions exist,
then business-governme nt relations will take certain
forms ."

Majoritarian Politics
Not all efforts to regulate business pit one group
against a nother. From time to time laws are passed
that reflect the views of a majority of voters that is
neither impos in g its will on a hostile business community nor acceding to the desires of a privileged
industry.
Much of the antitrust legislation passed in this
country, including the Sherman Act (1890) and
parts of the Federal Trade Commission Act (191 4)
and the Clayton Act (1914), has been the result of
majoritarian politics. Toward the end of the nineteenth century there arose a broadly based criticism
of business monopolies (then called trusts) and, to a
lesser extent, of large corporations, whether or not
they monopolized trade. The Grange, an organ ization of farmers , was especially outspoken in its criticism, and popular opinion generally-insofar as we
can know it in an era without pollsters- seems to
have been indigna nt about trusts and in favor of
"trustbusting." Newspaper ed itorials and magazine
articles frequently dwelt on the problem.1 5
But though a ntitru st fee ling was strong, it was
also relatively unfocused: no sin gle industry was the
special target of this criticism (th e oil industry, and
especially the Standard Oil Company, came as close
as a ny), and no specific regulation was proposed. In
fact there was no general agreement about how to
defin e the problem: for some it was monopoly; for
others sheer bi gness; and for still others the legal
basis of the modern corporation . The bill proposed by
Senator John Sherman did not clarify matters much:
while it made it a crime to "restrain" or "monopolize"
trade, it did not define these terms, nor did it create
a ny new regulatory agency charged with enforcing
the law. 16
No doubt some large corporations worried about
what all this would mean for them , but few felt sufficiently threatened to try very hard to defeat the bill.

It passed the Senate by a voice vote and the House by

a vote or 242 to 0.
Laws are not self-executing, and vague laws are
especially likely to lie dormant unless politica l lea ders
work hard at bringing them to life. For the first
decade or so after 1890, only one or two a ntitrust
cases a year were filed in the courts. In 1904 President Theodore Roosevelt persuaded Congress to provid e enough money to hire five full-time lawyers, and
soon the number of prosecutions increased to about
seven a year. Then in 19 38 President Fra nklin Roosevelt appointed as head of the Antitrust Division of
the Justice Department a vigorous lawyer named
Thurman Ar nold . who bega n bringing an average of
fifty cases a yea r.1 7 Today over four hundred lawyers
in the division sift through comp la ints alleging
monopolistic or other unfair business practices.
Though controversy exists over the kinds of cases
that should be brought, there is no serious effort
among eith er politicians or business leaders to abandon the commitment to a firm antitrust policy, the
strongest such policy to be found in any industrial
nation.
The antitrust laws were strengthen ed in 1914 by
bills that created the Federal Trade Commission a nd
made (via the Clayton Act) certain specifi c pra cti ces,
such as price discrimination , illegal. As with the earlier Sherman Act, the advocates of these measures
had a variety of motives. Some proponents favored
these laws because they would presumably help consumers (by preven ting unfair business practices);
other proponents supported them beca use they
might help business (by protecting firms against certain tactics that competitors might employ).
Pres id ent Woodrow Wilson endorsed both of
these bills an d helped create a broad coalition on
behalf of the legislation; the Federal Trade Commission Act and the Clayton Act passed Con gress by lopsid ed majorities. J 8
As with the Sherman Act, there has been continua l controversy about how these laws should be
administered. But this controversy, like the debate
over the initial passage of the laws, has not been
dominated by interest groups.19 The reason for the
relative absence of interest group activ ity is that
these laws do not divide society into permanent an d
identifiable blocs of proponents a nd opponents. Any
given business firm can be either helped or hur t by
the enforcement of the antitrust laws. One year th e
XYZ Widget Company may be sued by the govern-

The Case of Business Regulation

Interest Group Politics

The Gral1ge sought to warn Jarmers oj the dal1gers oj a
railroad mOl1opoly.

ment to prevent it from unfairly advertising its widgets, and the next year the same XYZ Company may
ask the government to prosecute its competitor for
trying to drive XYZ out of business by selling widgets
at prices below cost.
The amount of money that the federal government devotes to antitrust enforcement and the direction that those enforcement efforts take are
determined more by the political ideology and personal convictions of the administration in power
than by interest group pressures. For example, the
Reagan administration decided that the benefits of
trying to break up IBM were not worth the costs, and
thus it ended its antitrust prosecution of the giant
computer firm. At the same time, however, it decided
that it was desirable to break up American Telephone
and Telegraph (AT&T) , making the local phone companies independent of AT&T and forcing AT&T to
compete with other long-distance service providers.
In the 1990s the Clinton administration brought
an antitrust suit against computer software giant
Microsoft.
In sum, as with most majoritarian policies, antitrust
regulation tends to reflect broad philosophies of governance more than interest group activity.

Organized interest groups are very powerful. however, when the regulatory policies confer benefits on a
particular group and costs on another, equally distinct group.
In 1935 labor unions sought government protection for their right to organize, to bargain collectively
with industry, and to compel workers in unionized
industries to join the unions. Business firms opposed
these plans. The struggle was fought out in Congress,
where the unions won. The Wagner Act, passed that
year, created the National Labor Relations Board
(NLRB) to regulate the conduct of union organizing
drives and to hear complaints of unfair labor practices brought by workers against management.
But the struggle was far from over. In 1947 management sought to reverse some of the gains won by
unions by pressing for a law (the Taft-Hartley Act)
that would make illegal certain union practices (such
as the closed shop and secondary boycotts) and
would authorize the president to obtain a court order
blocking for up to eighty days any strike that imperiled the "national health or safety." Business won.
Business and labor fought round three in 1959
over a bill (the Landrum-Griffin Act) intended to prevent corruption in unions, to change the way in
which organizing drives were carried out, and to
prohibit certain kinds of strikes and picketing. Business won.
In each of these cases the struggle was highly
publicized. The winners and losers were determined
by the partisan composition of Congress (Republicans and southern Democrats tended to support
business, northern Democrats to support labor) and
by the existence of economic conditions (a depression in 1935, revelations of labor racketeering in
1959) that affected public opinion on the issue.
But the interest group struggle did not end with
the passage of the laws; it continued throughout
their administration. The National Labor Relations
Board, composed of five members appointed by the
president, had to adjudicate countless disputes
between labor and management over the interpretation of these laws. The losing party often appealed
the NLRB decision in the courts, where the issue was
fought out again. Moreover, each president has
sought to tilt the NLRB in one direction or another by
means of whom he appoints to it. Democratic presidents favor labor and thus tend to appoint prounion

481

482

Chapter 17

The Policy-MlIldng Process

board members; Republican presidents favor business and thus tend to appoint promanagement members. Since NLRB members serve five-year terms, a
new president cannot immediately appoint all of the
board's members; thus there is often a split on the
board between two factions.
A similar pattern of interest group influence is
revealed by the history of the Occupational Safety
and Health Act, passed in 1970. Labor unions wanted a strict bill with tough standards set by a single
administrator; business organizations wanted a
more flexible bill with standards set by a commission
that would include some business representatives.
After a long struggle labor won, and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), headed
by a single administrator, was set up inside the
Department of Labor.
As with the NLRB, conflict did not end with the
passage of the law, and OSHA decisions were frequently appealed to the courts. The poli tics swirling
about OSHA were all the more contentious because
of the vast mandate of the agency: it is supposed to
determine the safe limits for worker exposure to hundreds of chemicals and to inspect tens of thousands
of workplaces to see whether they should be cited for
violating any standards. During the Carter administration an OSHA administrator was appointed who
was sympathetic to the labor view and thus set
many standards and issued many citations; during
the Reagan administration an administrator was
selected who was admired by business because he set
fewer standards and issued fewer citations.

Client Politics
Many people suppose that when government sets out
to regulate business, the firms that are supposed to be
regulated will in fact "capture" the agency that is supposed to do the regulating. But as we have already
seen, certain kinds of policies-those that give rise
to majoritarian and interest group poJitics-do not
usually lead to capture, because the agency either
faces no well-organized, enduring opponent (as with
majoritarian politics) or is caught in a crossfire of
competing forces (as with interest group politics).
But when a policy confers a benefit on one group
at the expense of many other people, client politics
arises, and so agency "capture" is likely. More precisely, nothing needs to be captured at all, since the
agency will have been created from the outset to
serve the interests of the favored group. We some-

times think that regulations are always resisted . But
a regulation need not be a burden; it can be a great
benefit.
How this works can be seen close to home. State
and city laws regulate the practice of law and medicine as well as a host of other occupations-barbers,
beauticians, plumbers, dry cleaners, taxi drivers, and
undertakers. These regulations are sometimes
designed and always defended as ways of preventing
fraud, malpractice, and safety hazards. But they also
have the effect of restricting entry into the regulated
occupation, thereby enabling its members to charge
higher prices than they otherwise might. 20 Ordi~ar­
ily citizens do not obj ect to this, in part because .they
believe, rightly or wrongly, that the regulations in
fact protect them, and in part because the higher
prices are spread over so many customers as to be
unnoticed.
Much the same thing can be found at the national level. In the early 1930s the American dairy
industry was suffering from rapidly declining prices
for mille As the farmers ' incomes fell, many could no
longer pay their bills and were forced out of business.
Congress responded with the Agricultural Adjustment Act. which authorized an agency of the
Department of Agriculture to regulate the milk
industry. This agency, the Dairy Division of the Agricultural Marketing Service, would issue "market
orders" that had the effect of preventing price competition among dairy farmers and thus kept the price
of milk up. If this guaranteed minimum price leads
to the production of more milk than people want to
drink, then another part of the Agriculture Department- the Commodity Credit Corporation-stands
ready to buy up the surplus with tax dollars. 21
Consumers wind up paying more for milk than
they otherwise wou ld , but they have no way of
knowing the difference between the regulated and
unregulated price of milk (economists estimate that
it amounts to between five and twenty-one cents per
gallon).22 Consumers have little incentive to organize politically to do much about it. The total cost,
however, can be very high. Although consumers are
not helped by high prices, not every dairy farmer is
helped either. More milk is produced than people wi ll
buy. and so many dairy farmers have gone out of
business.
A simi la r system works with sugar. Sugar produced abroad, in countries such as Brazil and the
Philippines, costs much less than sugar produced

The Case of Business Regulation
here, in states such as Louisiana. To keep the incomes
of U.S. sugar producers high. Congress decided to
restrict the importation of cheap foreign sugar by
imposing quotas. This costs the consumer moneymaybe as much as $3 billion a year- but the extra
cost per pound of sugar is not noticeable. 23
From time to time various officials attempt to
change the regulations that benefit a cli ent group.
But they must confront some sobering political facts.
Dairy farmers are found scattered through scores of
con gressional districts; su gar beet growers are concentrated in southern states that are importan t in
any presidential election. Efforts have been made in
Congress to cut milk subsidies and sugar quotas, but
with only limited success.
In 1996 Congress passed and President Clinton
signed a bill that began, at least for wheat and corn
crops, to phase out the practice of paying farmers the
difference between what they can sell their crops for
and what the government thinks the crops ought to
be worth. It replaced these crop subsidies with direct
cash payments to farmers that they can use for anyth ing, including not farming.
But the 1996 plan to lure farmers into a freemarket economy did not last. Between 1996 and
2001, the subsid ies they got increased rather than
decreased. In 2002 President Bush signed a new
farm bill that did away with the 1996 law and
authorized pay ing farmers $171 billion in new subsidies by 2012. Though defended as a way of protecting "the little farmer," most of the money will go
to big farmers who produce wheat, corn, rice, cotton,
and soybeans (but not to those who produ ce cattle,
hogs, poultry, fruits, or vegetables).
Farm subsid ies are justilled by the fact that the
prices farmers earn swing wildly, but subsidies don't
go to people who make computer chips or raise cattle
even though they also experience big swings in the
prices they can charge. The existence of farm subsidies is the result of history (a legacy of the time, during the Great Depression, when the government
wanted to help nearly one-fourth of all employed
Americans who then worked on farms) and politics
(farmers are key and changeable voters in many
important states) .
Client politics has become harder to practice in
this country unless a group is widely thought to be a
"deserving" client. Dairy farmers, sugar producers,
and tobacco growers struggle (sometimes successfully, sometimes unsuccessfully) to keep their benefits.

483

Oniry farmers get governlllent subsidies for th eir milk production.

but the struggle relies on "insider politics"- that is,
on dealing with key Washington decision-makers
and not on buildin g widespread public support. By
contrast, when a devastating flood, tornado, earthquake. or hurricane strikes a community, the victims
are thou ght to be eminently deserving of help. After
all, people say, it was not their fault that their homes
were destroyed. (In fact in some cases it was, because
they built homes in a reas they knew were at high risk
for hurricanes or floods.) They receive client benefi ts.
Although client po litics for "special interests"
seems to be on the decline, that is true mostly for
programs th at actua lly send certain groups money.
Pietro Nivola reminds us of a different form of client
politics: using regulations instead of cash to help
groups. For exa mple, regu latio ns encourage the use
of eth anol (a kind of alcohol made from corn) in
gaso line, which benefits corn farmers and ethano l
manufacturers. Cli ents that might not be thought
leg itimate in creas ingly get their way by means of
regulations rather than subsidies.24
But regulation that starts out by trying to serve a
client can end up hurting it. Radio broadcasters supported the creation of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), which would, broadcasters and
telephone companies thought, bring order and stability to their industries. It did. But then it started
doing a bit more than the industries had hoped for. It
began reviewing efforts by companies to merge.
When one telephone company tried to merge with
another, the FCC said that it would have to review the
consolidation even though the law did not give it the
power to do so. After long (and secret) negotiations, it

484

Chapter 1 7

The Policy-Making Process

extracted concessions from the compa nies as a condition of their merger. Because there was no law
requirin g such concessions, the firms accepted them
"voluntarily." Bu t if they had not agreed, they would
h ave been in deep trouble with the FCC in the future.
Regulatory agencies created to help clients can
become burdens to those clients when the laws the
agen cies enforce a re sufficiently vague so as to provide freedom of action for the people who run them.
For a long time most of these laws were hopelessly
vague. The FCC, for example, was told to awa rd
licenses as "the public interest, convenience, a nd
necessity" required. In time such la nguage can give
a n agency wide, undefined powers.

Entrepreneurial Politics
During the 19 60s and 19 70s some two dozen consu mer- a nd enviro nmen ta l-protection laws were
passed, in cl udin g laws th at regul ated the a utomobile
industry, oil compa nies, toy ma nufacturers, poultry
producers, the chemica l industry, and pharmaceutica l compa nies.*
When measures such as these become law, it is
often beca use a policy entrepreneur h as dramatized
a n issue, galvanized public opinion. a nd mobilized
congressional support. Sometimes th at entrepreneur
is in the government (a senator or an outspoken
bureaucrat); sometimes that entrepreneur is a private
person (the best known. of course, is Ralph Nader).
The motives of such entrepreneurs can be either
self-serv ing or public-spirited: the poli cies that they
embrace may be either good or bad. Gust beca use
someone succeeds in regulating business does not
mean th at the public will necessarily benefit; by the
same token. just beca use business claims that a new
regulation will be excessively costly does not mea n
that business will in fact have to pay those costs.)
An early example of a policy entrepreneur inside
the government was Dr. Harvey Wiley, a chemist in
the Department of Agriculture, who actively campaigned for wh at was to become the Pure Food and
Dru g Act of 1906. Later Senator Estes Kefauver held

*The Motor Vehicle Air Pollution Control Act of 1965, the
National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966, the
Clean Air Act of 1970, the Water Qua lity Improvement Act
of 1970, the Ch ildren'S Protection and Toy Safety Act of
1969, the Wholesome Pou ltry Act of 1968, the Toxic
Substances Control Act of 1976, and the 1962 amendments to the Pure Food and Drug Act.

hearings that built suppor t for the 1962 drug laws
(and incidenta lly for his presidential bid), and Senator Edmund Muskie called attention to the need for
air a nd water pollution control legislation (and incidenta lly to his own 1972 presidential aspirations).
When a policy entrepreneur is outside the government, he or she will need a sympathetic ea r within it.
Occasion ally the policy needs of the entrepreneur
and the political needs of an elected official coincide.
When Ralph Na der was walking the corridors of the
Capitol looking for someone in terested in auto safety,
he found Senators Abraham Ribicoff a nd Warren
Magnuson, who themselves were looking for a n issue
with which they could be identified.
The task of the policy entrepreneur is made easier
when a crisis or scand al focuses public attention on a
problem. Upto n Sinclair 's book The lungle25 dramatized the fri ghtful conditions in meatpacking plants
at the turn of the century and helped pave the way
[or the Meat Inspection Act of 190 6. Th e stock ma rket collapse of 1929 helped develop suppor t for the
Securities a nd Exchange Act. When some people
who had ta ken a patent medicine (elixir of sulfanilamide) died as a result. the passage of the 1938 drug
laws became easier. Oil spilled on the beaches of
Santa Barbara, California, drew attention to problems addressed by the Water Quality Improvement
Act of 19 70 .
The dramatic event need not be a n actual crisis; in
some cases a political scandal w ill do. Highway fatalities were not a matter of great con cern to most
citizens when Congress began conSidering the autosafety act in 1965-1966, but support for the bill
grew when it was revea led that General Motors had
hired a private detective who made a clumsy effor t to
co llect (or ma nufacture) goss ip harmful to Ralph
Nader. whose book Unsafe at Any Speed h ad criticized
the safety of certain GM cars.
In some cases no dramatic event at all is required
for entrepreneurial politics to succeed. Most of the
air a nd water pollution co ntrol bills were passed
despi te the absence of a ny environmental catastrophe. 26 Suppor t for such meas ures was developed by
holding carefully pla nned committee hearings that
were closely followed by the media. For example, by
draw ing atte ntion to the profits of the pharmaceutica l compa nies. Sen ator Kefau ver was able to convince ma ny people tha t these firms were insensitive
to public needs. By draw ing on information made
ava ilable to him by environmenta li sts. Se nator
Muskie was abl e to ca pitalize on and help further a

The Case of Business Regulatiol1
growing perception in the country during the early
1970s that nature was in danger.
Because political resistance must be overcome
without the aid of a powerful economic interest group.
policy entrepreneurs seeking to regulate an industry
often adopt a moralistic tone, with their opponents
portrayed as devils, their allies viewed with suspicion,
and compromises fiercely resisted. When Senator
Muskie was drafting an air pollution bill, Ralph Nader
issued a highly publicized report attacking Muskie, his
nominal ally, for not being tough enough. This strategy forced Muskie-who wanted acclaim, not criticism,
for his efforts- to rev ise the bill so that it imposed even
more stringent standards. 27 Other a llies of Nader,
such as Dr. WilJiam Haddon, Jr. , and Joan Claybrook,
got the same treatment when they later became
administrators of the Nationa l Highway Traffic Safety
Administration . They came under attack not only
from the auto industry, for designing rules that the
companies thought were too strict, but a lso from
Nader, for devising rules that he thought were not
strict enough.
Once a policy entrepreneur manages to defeat an
industry that is resisting regulation, he or she createsat least for a while-a strong impetus for additional
legislation of the same kind. A successful innovator
produces imitators. in politics as in rock music. After
the auto safety law was passed in 1966, it became easier to pass a coal mine safety bill in 1969 and an occupational safety and hea lth bill in 1970.
The great risk faced by policy entrepreneurs is not
that their hard-won legislative victories will later be
reversed but that the agency created to do the regulating will be ca ptured by the industry that it is supposed to regulate. The Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), which regulates the ph arma ce utical industry,
has fallen victim during much of its history to precisely this kind of capture. Once the enthusia sm of its
found ers had waned and publi c attention had turned
elsewhere, the FDA seemed to develop a cozy and
rather uncritical attitude toward the drug compani es. (In 1958 the head of the FDA received an award
from th e Pharmaceutica l Ma nufacturers ' Association. )28 In the mid-19 60s, under the spur of renewed
co ngress ional and White House attention. the
agency was revitalized. During the Reaga n admini stration environmentalists worried that the leadership of the Environmental Protection Agency had
been turned over to persons who were unduly sympathetic to polluters.

485

Entrepre11eurial politics: Upt011 Si11c1air's book The Jungle, published i11 1906, shocked readers with its descriptio11 of c011ditions
in tiLe meatpacking industry and helped bring about passage of the
Meat l11spection Act of 1906.

There are at least five reasons, however, why the
newer consumer and env ironmenta l protection
agencies may not be as vulnerable to capture as some
critics contend. First, these agencies often enforce
laws that impose specific standards in accordance
with strict timetables, and so they have relatively little discretion. (The Environmenta I Protection
Agency, for example. is required by law to reduce certain pollutants by a fixed perce ntage within a stated
number of years.) Second , the n ewer agencies,
unlike the FDA, usually regulate many different
industries and so do not confront a single, unified
opponent. The Occupationa l Safety and Health
Administration, for exa mple. dea ls with virtually
every industry. Third , the very existence of these
agencies has helped strengthen the hand of the
"public interest" lobbies that initially demanded their
creation. Fourth. these lobbies can now call upon
ma ny sympathetic a llies in the media who will attack
agencies that are thought to have a probusiness bias.
Fina lly. as explained in Chapter 16, it has become
easier for groups to use the federa l courts to put
pressure on the regulatory agencies. These groups
do not have to be large or broadly representative of
the public; all they need are the services of one or
two able lawyers. If the Env ironmental Protection

Congress Approves Plan
!o Store NUclear Waste
In Nevada
July 23

MEMORANDUM

Las Vegas, Nevada
. Yesterday the U.S C
mg the U.S. Depart~en~:ress approved a bill allowplan to site 70 000 t
f Energy to proceed with a
.
'
ons 0 hlghl d'
waste m Nevada. Under the y ra loactive nuclear
Irradiated fuel from
1
plan, begllmmg in 20 10
to Nevada from citie~u~lear reactors would be shipped
over the country ...

To: J. Peter, assistant to the president
From: Dan Aaron, special assistant to
the president
Subject: Department of Energy Nuclear Waste Plan
The president must decide whether to sign the bill allowing the department to
establish a safe repository for the nation 's nuclear waste beneath mountains in
Nevada . The waste is produced mainly by 131 commercial nuclear reactors and by
national defense weapons programs. It is presently stored at 126 sites in over three
dozen states.
Arguments for:
1. For over fifty years, radioactive waste that remains deadly to humans for ten
thousand years has been accumulating in cities and towns throughout the country.
2. According to many experts, encasing the waste in well-engineered tunnels beneath
mountains in remote locations is both safer and more cost-effective than such
alternatives as storing it in ocean tunnels or propelling it into space.
3. The bill achieved a bipartisan majority. Polls find that most people know little about
the problem but believe that something should be done to increase safety.
Arguments against:
1. The department admits that transporting nuclear waste to the Nevada site through
dozens of states on trucks, trains, and barges would take decades and pose safety
risks.
2. Some experts argue that constructing a hundred-mile network of tunnels that
safely stores nuclear waste in disposal canisters for ten thousand years will prove
technologically difficult and f inancially burdensome.
3. The plan is strongly opposed by many elected officials in Nevada and surrounding
states, and a coalition of environmental groups is threatening to challenge it in
court.
Your decision:
Advise president to sign _ _ _
Advise president not to sign _ _ _

Perceptions. Beliefs. Interests, and Values

Agency (EPA) issues a rule disliked by a chemical
company. the company will promptly sue the EPA; if
it issues a ruling that pleases the company. the Environmental Defense Fund will sue.

Perceptions, Beliefs,
Interests, and Values
The politics of business regulation provides a good
illustration of the theory of policy-making offered in
this book. but the reader should not be misled by a
discussion of costs and benefits into thinking that all
or even most of politics is about getting or losing
money or that it is an easy matter to claSSify the costs
and benefits of a policy and thus put it into the correct pigeonhole.
For one thing. what constitutes a cost or a benefit
is a matter of opinion, and opinions change. We have
already said that it is the perception of costs and benefits that affects politics. If people think that laws
requiring factories to insta ll devices to remove from
their smokestacks chemicals that contribute to acid
rain can be implemented in ways that make the companies but not the consumers pay the bills. they will
favor such measures. and the affected industries will
oppose them. But if people believe that the cost of
preventing acid rain will be borne by them- in the
form of fewer jobs or higher prices-then these citizens may be less enthusiastic about such measures.
Some people favor having the government regulate the price of natural gas, and others oppose it.
One reason for the conflict. obviously. is that people
who use natural gas in their homes want to buy it
cheaply. whereas people who work in the natural gas
industry want gas prices to go up so that they can
earn more. Interests are clearly in conflict.
Yet some users may oppose regulating the price of
gas because they believe that keeping the price of gas
artificially low now will discourage exploration for
new gas fields. thereby creating shortages-and
much higher prices-in the future. Thus beliefs are
also in conflict; in this case some users believe that it
is more important to take the long view and worry
abo ut gas shortages ten years [rom now. while others
believe that what co unts is how much you have to
pay for natural gas today.
A political conflict is in large measure a struggle to
make one dellnition of the costs and benefits of a proposal prevail over others; that is. it is a struggle to alter

Though many economists question the value of the Small
Business Administratioll. it remains popular iJeca use it
loans money to a lot oj voters.

perceptions and beliefs. Material interests do playa
part in all this: the more you stand to gain or lose in
hard cash from a proposal. the harder it will be for
someone else to change your mind about your position. But many, perhaps most, government proposals
will not have an immediate. unambiguous impact on
your pocketbook. and so your perceptions and beliefs
about what will happen in the future become the prize
for which political activists compete.
In that competition certain arguments enjoy a natural advantage over others. One might be called the
here-and-now argument. What happens now or in the
near future is more important to most people than
what happens in the distant future. (Economists refer
to this as the human tendency to "discount the
future.") Thus most users of natural gas probably
care more about present prices than future shortages.
and so many wUI tend to favor price regulation today.
Another political tactic that enjoys a natural
advantage might be called the cost argument. People
seem to react more sharply to what they will lose if a
policy is adopted than to what they may gain. Thus
there will usually be strong opposition to putting a
tax on imported oil. even if the benefit gained will be
to reduce our dependence on foreign oil.

487

488

Chapter 17

The Policy-Making Process

Poli ticians know the value of the here-and-now
and the cost arguments and so try to present their
proposals in ways that take adva ntage of these sentiments. Regulations a imed at new drugs. for example.
wiJl emphasize the harm th at will be prevented now
from keepin g dangerous drugs off the market, not the
harm that may come later if lifesav ing drugs with
some dangerous side effects are kept ofT the ma rket.
Plans to solve the problems of our Social Security system stress keeping intact the benefits now received by
peopl e a lready retired. postponing into the future the
tax increases necessary to pay for these benefits.
Policies are affected not only by our perceptions
and beliefs about where our interests lie but also by
our values-that is. by our conceptions of what is
good for the country or for our community. Many
whites. for example. want to see opportunities
increased for minorities. not because such opportunities will make w hites better off but because they
think that it is the right thing to do. Many citizens
worry about politica l conditions in the Middle East.
not beca use they fear having to fi ght a war there or
beca use they work for a company that does business
there but because they wish a better life for peopl e
who live in that reg ion and want them to be free of
terrorists a nd dictatorsh ips. Some citizens oppose
restrictions on the sa le of obscene ma gazines and
others favor those restrictions; neither group stands
to benefit- those who oppose censorship usually
don ' t plan to read the publications, a nd those who
favor it would not thereby have their own lives
improved- yet both groups often advocate their
opposing views with great passion.
All this may seem obvious, but the reader should
recall how often h e or she assumes that people are
only "looking out for themselves" and so politics is
only about "who gets what." We all have a tendency
to be a bit cynical about government-that is, to
impute self-seeking motives to whoever is involved.
Since there is plenty of self-interest in politics, th is
assumption is often a pretty good one. But following
it blindly can lead us to ignore those cases in which
ideas- beli efs, perceptions. and va lu es- are the decisive forces in politica l confli ct.

Deregulation
In the 1980s severa l industri es were deregulated
over the objections of those industries. Airline fa res
were once set by the Civ il Aerona utics Board. The
airlines liked it that way- it kept competition dow n

a nd pri ces up. But today a irlin e fares are set by the
market, w ith the resu lt that in so me (but not all)
areas fares are lower tha n they once were. Not on ly
did most a irlines fi ght tooth and na il to prevent thi s
dereg ul ation from occur ring. but so me couldn 't
adjust to the new era of competition a nd . like Eastern
Airlin es, we nt bankrupt.
Long-distance telephone serv ices were once provided on a monopo ly basis by AT&T; its prices were
set by the Federa l Communi cations Commission.
Today there are several long-distance telephone systems- MCr. Sprint, AT&T-and prices are heavily
influenced by competition . AT&T was not eager to
have this happen, but it cou ldn' t prevent it.
Once, the number of trucking companies and the
prices they charged were set by the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC). The trucking companies
and the Teamsters Un ion favored this pattern of regulation- as with the airlines. the system kept competition down and prices up. But then Congress
changed the law, and in January 199 6 the ICC was
abolished.
People who think that politics is simply the result of
deals stru ck between certa in favored industries and
friend ly or "captured" agencies wou ld have a ha rd
time expl aining this period of deregul ation. Client
politics-the cozy relationship (or "iron triangle")
between a private client, a government agency, and a
supportive Congress- was ended. How did it happen?
Martha Derthick and Pa ul Quirk, two po litical scientists, answered the qu estion in their book The Politics of Deregulatiol1 .29 The key to that answer is the
power of ideas. Academic economi sts were in agreement that regulating prices in industries that were
co mpetitive, or could easily be made so, was a bad
idea; the regulations hurt consumers by keeping
prices artificially high . But academic id eas by themselves are powerless. In the three cases described
above, key political leaders-Presidents Carter, Ford,
and Reagan, and Senators Edward Kennedy and
Howard Ca nnon -accepted and acted on these
ideas, a lbeit for very different reaso ns. The regulatory co mmiss ions- the Civil Aeronatics Board (CAB),
the Federal Co mmuni cations Commission (FCC), the
ICC- were led by peop le who wanted to deregulate.
In one case, the breakup of AT&T, a federa l judge
made many of the key decisions. The public did not
support deregu lation , but it was concern ed about
infl ation. a nd deregu lation co uld be defended as a
way of bringing prices down. Fina lly, the industri es

Su m mary

that fought to save their client relationships with
government-the airlines. the trucking companies.
the phone company-were not wildly popu lar bus inesses: once they were subjected to po litical criticism. they found th at they had relatively few allies.
Since the mid-1 970s every president has put in
place machinery to bring government regu lation of
industry under more central review. President Ford
in 1974 ordered all regulatory agencies to assess
the inflationary impact of their decisions. President
Carter in 1978 directed each agency to consider
alternative ways of achieving the goals of regulation. President Reagan in 1981 created the Task
Force on Regulatory Relief and instructed those
agencies under his control not to issue a regulation if.
in the judgment of the Office of Management and
Budget. its potential benefits to society did not outweigh its costs. 30 President Bush the elder essentially
continued the Reagan system.
Deregulation is opposed. of co urse. by gro ups that
benefit from it. But it is controversial in at least two
other ways. First. some members of the pub lic do not
like the results. especially if the world becomes more
complicated as a result of relying on the market.
Many people liked CAB control of the airlines. for
example. because the higher prices kept the number
of air travelers down. and so airports were less congested. Second. some people who favor deregulating
prices oppose deregulating processes. Process regulation (sometimes called social regulation) includes

*
P

rules aimed at improving consumer or worker safety
and reducing environmental damage. There are good
and bad ways of achieving these goa ls. and much of
the dispute about regulation concerns the question
of means. not ends. The intensity of that dispute
shows how important perceptions and bel iefs are
even when economic interests are at stake.

The Limits of Ideas
Ideas can be powerful . but th ere are limits to their
power. There are many forms of client politics that
persist- some because people agree that the client
deserves to benefit. others because the conditions do
not exist for mounting an effective challenge to the
client.
Dairy. sugar. and other agricultural price supports
are paid for by tax payers. Regulations that increased
above market levels the prices charged by airlines
and trucking companies were successfully ch allenged; regulations th at increased above market levels the prices charged by oceangoing freighters were
not. The wages pa id to airline pilots and truck drivers
are no longer protected by federal rules; the wages
paid to merchant seamen and construction workers
employed on federal projects still are.
It is not entirely clear why it is easier to cha llenge
client politics in some industries and occupations
than in others. We can say. however. why it is generally harder to maintain client politics free of challenge today than once was th e case.

SUMMARY

olicy-making involves two stages-placing an

issue on the governmental agenda and deciding
what to do about that issue once it is on the agenda.
The agenda stead ily expands as the result of historical crises. interest group activity. the competition for
votes. and the operation of key institutions. especially the courts. the bureaucracy. and the mass med ia.
Decision-making requ ires that a majority coalition be formed. The kinds of coalitions that form will
depend in large measure on the nature of the issue.
especially the perceived distribution of costs and benefits. We h ave iden tified four kinds of coalitions. or
distinctive political processes: majoritarian. client.
interest grouP. and entrepreneurial.
Government regulation of business illustrates the
relationship between these four kinds of policies and

the sorts of coalitions that will form in each instance.
These case studies make clear that there is no single.
simple answer to the question of how much influence business has over government (or vice versa).
The outcome of these poli tical stTUggles will depend
not only on who gains and who loses but also on the
perceptions. beliefs. and values of key political actors.
The example of airline deregulation shows that changes
in how people think can make a big difference even in
the case of poliCies where money interests are at stake.
process regulation

Rules governing commercial activities designed to improve consu mer,
worker, or environmental conditions. Also
called social regulation.

4 89

490

Chapter 1 7

The Policy-Maldn9 Process

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?

1. Does some political elite dominate American

politics?
People active in politics are a n elite in the sense that
they playa larger role than most ci tizens. But there
are so many American elections a nd so ma ny places
where political action can be blocked that no single
elite can dominate. Business corporations, for exa mple, are an importa nt interest group, but they only
dominate client poli tics, a nd even then their inl1uences can be overcome by entrepreneurial politics.

2. Do powerful interest groups decide what policies
our government should adopt?
Over the last half cen tury, there has been a sh arp
in crease in the number a nd va riety of inte rest
gro ups so that in interest group poli tics there are
a lways rival organizations co mpetin g for influence.
In client politics, one interest group can dominate
decision-making, but client poli tics is becoming rarer
as new interest groups emerge.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. Why are Social Security payments popular but
welfare payments to unwed mothers unpopular?
For two reasons: First, people who get retirement
benefits have paid money into the program, while
those who get welfare benefi ts have not. Second,
ma ny peopl e think elderly people wh o have retired
a re legitimate recipients of paymen ts but that unwed
mothers are not.

2. Why were government regulations on certain
industries repealed over the objection of those
industries?
There were severa l reasons. but the most important
were new ideas. When enough political leaders became
convinced that government-regulated airfares, bartk
interest rates, and trucking charges made people pay
more money than would fares. rates. and charges set by
the market. government regulation was abandoned.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

onpartisan reviews of public policy iss ues:
www.policy.com
www.publicagenda.org

For partisan discussion of issues, use the World
Wide Web addresses of the Was hington, D.C. , think
tanks listed in Chapter 11 .

SUGGESTED READINGS
Derthick. Martha. Up ill SlIIoke. Was hi ngton D.C. : Congressiona l
Quarterly Press. 2002. Fa scinating accoun t of bow lawyers a nd
tobacco compa nies created a priva te regulation of smokin g.
Derthick. Martha . and Pa ul J. Qui rk . Tile Politics of Dereguiatioll.
Wa shin gton. D.C.: Brook ings ln stitution. 1985 . A brilli a nt
a n a lysis of h ow t hree in du stries- a irlin es. tr uckin g, a nd
telecomm u ni ca t io ns- were deregul ated. often in t he teeth of
in du stry oppos ition.
Kin gdon . John W. Agelldas. Alternatives. {/Ild PuiJlic Policies. Boston:
Littl e, Brow n. 1984. An insigh tful accou nt of how iss ues.
especia lly th ose invo lvin g hea lth a nd transportation. geton (or
drop off) th e federa l agend a .

Lowi. Theodore J. 'I\merican Business. Pu blic Policy. Case Studies,
a nd Politi ca l Theory. " World Politics 1 (, (J uly 1964). A theory of
policy-makin g somewha t di fferent fro m th at offered in this book.
Na del. Ma rk V. Tile Politics of COIISlII ller Protection. 2 d ed. India napo lis: Bobbs-Merri ll . 1975 . An ana lysis of t he sources a nd
uses of pol iti ca l infl uence in con su mer legislation.
Po isby, Nelso n W. Politicn l 1I1 110vation ill America . New Haven ,
Co nn .: Ya le Un iversity Press. 1984. Ex pl a ins h ow eigh t poli cy
inn ovatio ns we re adopted by the fed era l government.
Wilso n. Ja mes Q.. cd. The Politics of Hegulatioll. ewYork: Basic Books.
198 0. A naly~es regul atory politics in nine agencies a nd provides
a more deta iled statement of the theory presen ted in this text.

CHAPTER

18

Economic Policy

The Politics of Economic Prosperity
What Politicians Try to Do

The Politics of Taxing and Spending
Economic Theories and Political Needs
Monetarism • Keynesianism •
Planning • Supply-Side Tax Cuts •
Ideology and Theory • "Reaganomics"

The Machinery of Economic Policy
Making
The Fed •

Congress

Spending Money
The Budget
Reducing Spending
Levying Taxes
The Rise of the Income Tax

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

Who in the federal government can
make our economy strong?

I

Why does the federal government
ever have a budget deficit?

f you are like most Americans, you do not think it is a good idea for the government to spend more money each year than it takes in from taxes. When
it does that, we have a deficit . If you add up all of the deficits we have had
since George Washington was president, the total amount is the national
d e bt. Running a defiCit, and worse acquiring a big national debt, probably
reminds you of the head of a household who spends more money than he or
she earns in wages. Pretty soon that person will have to declare bankruptcy.
The federal government never has to declare bankruptcy because, when it
needs more money, it borrows it by selling bonds. These bonds, guaranteed
by the government, are always repaid. Of course, Washington must also pay
interest on this debt, and those interest payments are made every year. In a
typical year, interest payments are the third-biggest item in the national budget. right after money spent on income redistribution and nationa l defense.
But almost every American also has debt. You get a mortgage to pay for
your house and borrow money to buy furniture and a car. If you can make
the monthly payments on these loans, you are not bankrupt.
To see what our national debt really means. you have to do what the head
of every household does: compare how much you owe with how much you
earn. In Figure 18.1, you can see that nationa l debt held by the public
(because of the bonds they have bought) is about 40 percent of our gross
domestic product, or GDP. (The GDP means the total of all of the goods
and services produced in the country during a given year.) The national debt
in 2004 was about the same percentage of GDP that it was in 1964.
We could get rid of our annual deficit and make progress toward reducing our total national debt if we did one or both of two things: raise taxes or
cut spending. In general, politica l conservatives want to cut spending and
political libera ls want to raise taxes.
In 1996 the arguments between these groups were so intense that the
Republican Congress refused to pass President Clinton's spending plan and
the president refused to sign Congress's spending bills. As a result the government (brieOy) ran out of money, and many agencies had to close their
doors for a while.
During the two years when we had no deficit, the politicians claimed that
their policies had made it disappear. Some of their efforts no doubt helped.
For examp le, Congress had adopted some important restrictions on any
new spending plans by requiring that an increase in money for one program must be met by a similar decrease in spending on another. But the
main reason the deficit disappeared was that the American economy had

4 92

The Politics oj Economic Prosperity
Figure 18.1
_

The National Debt as Percentage of GOP. 1960-2008

Government-held debt
(Soc ial Security and other trust fund s)

_

Debt held by the publi c

80

70
CL

0

60

C?
<fl

:n'"
Ql

50

"0

"iii
c
.Q

roc

40

I:

nnl~

a

Ql

CD

30

2c

Ql

~

I III
I

rr

I

~

U

W 20

CL

10

0

•

C

,
1960

493

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

2005

Note.· Fiscal year 2004-2008 are projections based on t he president's budget.
Source. Budget of the US. Government Fisca l Year 2004. On Web at: www.aaas.org/spp/rd/debt05b.pdf

grown so rapidly and produced so much new personal income that Washington was fl ooded with tax
money.
Then a new debate began: what shou ld we do with
all the extra money? One group, primarily Repu blicans, wanted to give the surplus back to the people by
cutt ing taxes. An other group, primarily Democrats ,
wanted to use the surplus for new progra ms.
Both of these goals were served . As for the first,
President George W. Bush proposed and Congress
passed the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 , which, over a ten-year period,
will do the fo ll owing:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Cut tax rates on all income groups*
Increase the tax credit for chi ldren
Make it easier to ded uct expenses
Eliminate the "marria ge pena lty"
Make it eas ier to save for edu ca tion
Phase out the tax on estates of deceased persons

*The tax rates would fall as fo llows: from 28 to 25 percent,
from 31 to 28 percent, from 36 to 33 percent, and f rom
39 .5 to 35 percent.

In 2004 Co ngress decid ed to make three of these tax
cuts permanent so they would not expire in 2010.
They were cuts in the tax rate on Ameri cans with the
lowest earn ings, increasing the tax credit for children. a nd assuring the end of the marriage penalty.
(The marriage pen alty had made it possib le for a
married couple to pay more in taxes than they would
have if they had remained single.)
You may wonder about the effect the tax cuts that
are still scheduled to expire in 2010 will h ave on the
American economy. Bu t nobody knows, even among
our best economists. The Office of Management and
Budget (OMB), par t of the Wh ite House, a nd the

deficit

What occurs when the government in
one year spends more money than it takes in
from ta xes.
national debt The total deficit from the first
presidency down to the present.
gross domestic product The total of all goods
and services produced in the economy during a
given year.

494

Chapter 18

Figure 18.2
-

Ecol1omic Policy

Bad Economic Guesses
Actual

-

Projected

200
150
100
50
V;
c:
.S'

0

:0
c:

- 50

<n

~ - 100

(;

0

-150
- 200
- 250
- 300
1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Note: The figure compares the actua l budget deficit or surplus with the president's projection made f ive
years earlier

Source.· NationaiJournal (January 30, 1999), 251.

Congressional Budget Office (CBO), part of Congress,
employ skill ed eco nomists who try to estimate what
the money world will look like in the future, but just
like economists in the private sector, they make big
mistakes.
Between 1993 and 1997 the OMB and CBO predicted that we would have a bigger deficit than we
actually had. In 1997 they thought that our deficit
would be almost nine times greater than it really was
(see Figure 18 .2) . In 1995 the CBO guessed that
these deficits would continue until 2002, but by
1999 it had changed its mind: instead we would have
big surpluses. 1 If they were wrong about more
deficits, would they be right about new surpluses? In
1999 the CBO said that over the next ten years the
government would take in $2.9 trillion more than it
would spend . But just three years later. in 2002. the
CBO said that we would have a deficit of $121 billion
in 2003 and $51 billion in 2004.
It changed its mind for several reasons. Because
of the terrorist attack on September 11, the government had to spend huge new sums on the damages,
the ens uing war in Afgh anistan and Iraq required a
lot of money. and the defense buildup to prevent
future attacks cost ma ny billions of dollars. Then the

economy went into a recession . so that tax revenu es
were sharply reduced a nd social programs req uired
more spending.

;- The Politics of Economic
Prosperity
The health of the American economy creates majoritarian politics. Hardly anyone wants inl1ation or
unemployment; everyone wants rapid increases in
income and wealth. But this fact is a bit puzzling. You
might think that people would care about their own
jobs and worry only about avoiding their own unemployment. If that were the case, they would vote for
po liticians who promised to award contracts to firms
that would hire them or who wou ld create programs
that would benefit them. regardless of how well
other people were getting along. In fact. though, people see connections between their own well-being
and that of the nation, and they tend to hold politicia ns responsible for the state of the country.
Everybody knows that just before an election politicians worry about the pocketbook issue. We have seen
in Chapter 10 that economic conditions are strongly

The Politics oj Economic Prosperity
associated with how much success the incumbent
party has in holding on to the White House and to the
seats held by the White House's party in Congress. But
whose pocketbook are voters worried about?
In part, of course, it is their own. We know that
low-income people are more likely to worry about
unemployment and to vote Democratic. and higherincome people are more likely to worry about inflation and to vote Republican. 2 We also know that
people who tell pollsters that their families' finances
have gotten worse are more likely than other people
to vote against the incumbent president. 3 In 1980
about two-thirds of those who said that they had
become worse off economically voted for Ronald
Reagan, the challenger. while over half of those who
felt that they had become better off voted for Jimmy
Carter, the incumbent. 4 In 1992 people who felt
economically pinched were more likely to vote for
Clinton than for Bush. Clinton campaign aides often
reminded each other, "It's the economy. stupid!"
But people do not simply vote their own pocketbooks. In any recession the vast majority of people
still have jobs; nevertheless, these people say that
unemployment is the nation's biggest problem, and
many of them vote accordingly-against the incumbent during whose watch unemployment went up. s
Why should employed people worry about other people's unemployment?
By the same token younger voters. whose incomes
tend to go up each year, often worry less about inflation than do retired people living on fixed incomes,
the purchasing power of which goes down with inflation. 6 In presidential elections those people who think
that national economic trends are bad are much
more likely to vote against the incumbent. even when
their own personal finances have not worsened. 7
In technical language voting behavior and economic conditions are strongly correlated at the
national level but not at the individual level, and this
is true both in the United States and in Europe. 8 Such
voters are behaving in an "other-regarding" or
"sociotropic" way. In ordinary language voters seem
to respond more to the condition of the national
economy than to their own personal finances.
It is not hard to understand why this might be
true. Part of the explanation is that people understand what government can and cannot be held
accountable for. If you lose your job at the aircraft
plant because the government has not renewed the
plant's contract, you will be more likely to hold the
government responsible than if you lose your job

because you were always showing up drunk or
because the plant moved out of town.
And part of the explanation is that people see general economic conditions as having indirect effects on
them even when they are still doing pretty well. They
may not be unemployed, but they may have friends
who are, and they may worry that if unemployment
grows worse, they will be the next to lose their jobs.

What Politicians Try to Do
Elected officials, who have to run for reelection every
few years, are strongly tempted to take a short-run
view of the economy and to adopt those policies that
will best satisfy the self-regarding voter. They would
dearly love to produce low unemployment rates and
rising family incomes just before an election. Some
scholars think that they do just this.
Since the nineteenth century the government has
used money to affect elections. At first this mostly
took the form of patronage passed out to the party
faithful and money benefits given to important blocs
of voters. The massive system of Civil War pensions
for Union army veterans was run in a way that did no
harm to the political fortunes of the Republican party.
After the Social Security system was established, Congress voted to increase the benefits in virtually every
year in which there was an election (see Chapter 19).
But it is by no means clear that the federal government can or will do whatever is necessary to
reduce unemployment, cut inflation, lower interest
rates , and increase incomes just to win an election.
For one thing. the government does not know how
to produce all these desirable outcomes. Moreover,
doing one of these things may often be possible only
at the cost of not doing another. For example, reducing inflation can, in many cases, require the government to raise interest rates, and this in turn can slow
down the economy by making it harder to sell houses, automobiles, and other things that are purchased
with borrowed money.
If it were easy to stimulate the economy just
before an election, practically every president would
serve two full terms. But because of the uncertainties
and complexities of the economy, presidents can lose
elections over economic issues that they do not manage to the satisfaction of voters. Ford lost in 1976,
Carter in 1980, and George H.W. Bush in 1992. In
all cases economic conditions played a major role.
All this means that politicians must make choices
about economic policy, choices that are affected by
uncertainty and ignorance. Those choices are shaped

495

496

Chapter 18

Economic Policy

Protesters denounce a planned tax increase by the Texas legislnture.

significantly by the ideological differences between the
two poli tical parties over what ought to be the principal
goal of economic policy. Democrats and Republicans
al ike would prefer to have both low unemployment
and no inflation. but if they must choose (and choose
they must). then the Democrats mainly attempt to
reduce unemployment and the Republicans chiefly
attempt to reduce inflation. 9 This is no hard-and-fast
rule; some say that Jimmy Carter. a Democrat. tried so
hard to cut inflation in 1980 that he lost the support of
many liberal Democrats. such as Edward Kennedy.
who thought that he should be worrying more about
creating jobs. But the general tendency seems clear:
the Democratic party worries more about unemployment. the Republican party about inflation.
This tendency mirrors to so me degree what
Democratic a nd Republican voters want their parties
to do. Polls regul arly show that those who think of
themselves as Democrats are much more worried
about unemployment than those who think of themselves as Republicans.lO (There is not as much of a
difference between Democratic and Republican voters in worrying about innation.) Because of these
beliefs. voters concerned about unemployment not
only are more likely to vote against the incumbent
but also are more likely to vote Democratic.

The Politics of Taxing and
Spending
People want prosperity. but they also want no ta x
increases. no government deflcit, and continued (or
higher) government spending on the things they like.

such as education. med ica l care. the env ironment.
and retirement beneflts. But it is obvious that voters
ca nnot have all of these things: it is impossible to produce generous spending on progra ms with low taxes
and no defl cit.
What politicians confi:ont are two inconsistent
kinds of majoritarian po litics: everybody wants genera l prosperity. and large majorities want more govern ment spend ing on popu lar programs. But the
more the government spends on popular programs.
the more money it requires. and the more it takes in.
the less that is left over for private investment that
produces prosperity.
Most voters wou ld like to have all three actionslower taxes. less debt, and new programs. All three
produce majoritarian politics. But the difficulty with
this is that the policies being endorsed are inconsistent with one another. We cannot have lower taxes.
no debt. and higher spending on politically popular
programs such as health care. education. the environment. and retirement benefits. If we have more
spending. we have to pay for it. either with higher
taxes or with more borrowing.
When tbere was a big annua l delkit. there was no
new money to pass out. People wbo wanted new programs h ad to either cut existing programs. let the
government go deeper in debt. or raise taxes. But
bow do you raise taxes without ali enating voters?
Tbe answer is that you raise taxes on other people.
The "other people" are always a minority of the
voters. For example. if you want to put more money
into medica l research (something that everybody
likes), you raise taxes on cigarettes (only a minority
smoke them) . If you want to pay for new education
programs or bigger environmental programs. you
raise taxes on af11uent voters. In tbis way you can flnd
a majority of voters who will support- or at least not
oppose very strongly-tax increases on a sma ll group
of voters-cigarette smokers or h igh-income people.
Many politicians believe that lowering everyone 's
tax rate is a good idea. They say this because they
don 't tb ink the government needs as much money as
it now receives. Other politicians wbo want the govern ment to bave more money wi ll not oppose a tax
cut; instead they will insist that it be limited to ordinary people (and thus denied to affluent ones) and
targeted for specific activities (s uch as ed ucation or
child care) that the government wants to enco urage.
Since there are fewer affluent people than average
ones, lowering the top tax rate always has less politica l muscle behind it than keeping the top rate high.

Ecol1omic Tlleories al1d Political Needs
Legislators who like high rates say that "people who
can afford it should pay a lot." Legislators who want
low rates say that their opponents are trying to "soa k
the rich " by denying tax cuts to the people who now
pay the biggest share of taxes.
Because cutting taxes to any meaningful extent is
politically difficult, politicians have a strong tendency to get reelected by spending public money on specific programs that are popular. Some of these
programs may involve majoritarian politics (such as
Social Security or highway construction); some may
involve client politics (such as grants to businesses,
universities, or other special interests). This means
that increasing spending will tend to be more popular than cutting taxes.

*

Economic Theories and
Political Needs
Since most tax issues are majoritarian issues, they
involve the president. He takes a direct and visible lead
in these matters. If everyone who advised him knew
what effect a change in tax laws would have, it would
probably be easier for him to make economic policy.
But the economic health of a nation is an extraordinarily complex, poorly understood matter. Nations,
such as the old Soviet Union, that have tried to manage their economies centrally have done poorly.
Presidents rely on economic advisers, but the
advice they get varies dramatically depending on
what kind of advisers they have. There are at least
four major theories about how best to manage the
economy. Each theory, if fully stated, would be quite
complicated; moreover. many experts combine parts
of one theory with parts of another. What fo llows is
a highly simplified account of these theories that
highlights their differences.

Monetarism
A monetarist, such as the economist Mi lton Friedman, believes that infl ation occurs when there is too
much money chasing too few goods. The federal government has the power to create money (in ways to
be described on page 500); according to monetarists,
inflation occurs when it prints too much money.
When inflation becomes rampant and government
tries to do something about it, it often cuts back
sharply on the amount of money in circulation.
Then a recession will occur, with slowed economic

growth and an increase in unemployment. Since the
government does not understand that economic
probl ems result from its own start-and-stop habit of
issu ing new money, it will try to cure some of these
problems with poliCies that make matters worsesuch as having an unbalanced budget or creating
new welfare programs. Monetarism suggests that
the proper thing for government to do is to have a
steady, predictable increase in the money supply at a
rate about equal to the growth in the economy's productivity; beyond that it should leave matters a lone
a nd let the free market operate.

Keynesianism
John Maynard Keynes, an English economist who
died in 1946, believed that the market will not automatically operate at a fu ll-employment, low-inflation
level. Its health depends on what fraction of people's
incomes they save or spend. If they save too much,
there will be too little demand , production will
decline, and unemployment will rise. If they spend
too much, demand wil l rise too fast , pri ces will go up,
and shortages will develop. According to Keyn esianism , the key is to create the right level of
demand. This is the task of government. When
demand is too little, the government should pump
more money into the economy (by spending more
than it takes in in taxes and by creating public-works
programs) . When demand is too great. the government should take money out of the economy (by
increasing taxes or cutting federal expenditures).
There is no need for the government's budget to be
balanced on a year-to-year basis; what counts is the
performan ce of the economy. Keynesians. unlike
monetarists. tend to favor an activist government.

Planning
Some economists have too little faith in the workings of the free market to be pure Keynes ians, much
less monetarists. They believe that the government

The bel ief that inflation occurs
when too much money is chasing too few
goods.
Keyn esianism The belief the government
must manage the economy by spending more
money when in a recession and cutting spending when t here is infl at ion.
monetarism

497

498

Chapter 18

Economic Policy

should pla n, in varying ways, some part of the country's economic activity. One form of economic
pla nning is price a nd wage contro ls. as advocated
by John Kenneth Galb raith and others. In this view
big corporations ca n raise prices beca use the forces of
competition are too weak to restrain them, and labor
unions can force up wages beca use management
find s it easy to pass the in creases a long to co nsumers
in the form of higher prices. Thus during inflationary times the government should regul ate the maximum prices that can be charged and wages that can
be paid, at least in the larger industries.
In the mid-19 80s inf'i ation was not the probl em
that it once had been, however; instead the automakers were cutting car prices and labor unions were
accepting wage red uction s. This shift drew attention
to a different form o[ economic plann ing. Called a n
industria l policy, it reflected the public's concern for
the declining health o[ certain basic industries such
as stee l a nd automobile manufacturing. Peopl e
thought that these "smokestack" industries would
not recover through market forces; what was needed
instead was [or the government somehow to direct or
plan investments so that either these industries would
recover or new and better industries would take their
place. Advocates of this form of planning often pOint
to Japan as an example of a country in which the government directs industri a l investments.

Supply-Side Tax Cuts
Exactly the opposite remedy [or decl ining American
productivity is suggested by people who call themselves supply-siders. The view of economists such as
Arthur Laf[er and Paul Cra ig Roberts is that the market, rar from having [ailed, has not been given an adequate chance. Accord ing to supply-side th eory,
what is needed is not more planning but less government interference. In particular, sharply cutting taxes

economic planning The belief that government plans, such as wage and price controls or
the direction of investment, can improve the
economy.
supply-side theory The belief that lower taxes
and fewer regulations will stimulate the
economy.
Reaganomics The belief that a combination of
monetarism, lower federal spending, and supply-side econom ics will st imulate the economy.

will increase people's incentive to work, save, and
invest. Greater investments will then lead to more
jobs, and if the earnings rrom these investments and
jobs are taxed less, it will lessen the tendency or many
individuals to shelter their earnings [rom the tax collector by taking advantage of various tax loopholes or
cheating on their income tax return s. The greater
productivity or the economy will produce more tax
revenue for the government. Even though tax rates
will be lower, the total nationa l income to which these
rates are app lied will be higher.

Ideology and Theory
Each economi c theory has clear pol itical consequences, and so it is no accident that peop le embrace
one theory or another in part because or their poli tical beliers. If you are a conservative, monetarism or
supply-side tax cuts wi ll appea l to you, because both
imply that the government will be smaller and less
intrusive. H you are a libera l. Keynesian economics
will ap pea l to you, beca use it perm its (or even
requires) the redera l government to carryon a wide
range of socia l welfare programs. And i[ you are a
socialist, economic planning will appea l to you,
because it is an alternative to the free market and the
private management of economic reso urces.
Of course, there are ma ny exceptions to these patterns. Many advocates of so-called industrial policy
are not socia lists; some libera ls have become skeptical
of Keynesian economics; a nd quite a few conservatives think that supply-side economics is unrealistic.
But in general one's economic theory tends to be consistent with one's political convictions.

{{Reaganomics"
When Ronald Reagan became president in 1981, he
set in motion changes in federal economic policies that
were soon ca lled Rea ganomics. These cha nges were
not dictated by any single economic theory but by a
combination o[ monetarism, supply-side tax cuts, and
domestic budget cutting. The president wanted to
achieve several goals Simultaneously-reduce the
size of the federa l government, stimulate economic
growth, and increase American military stTength. As
it turned out for him (as for most presidents), the
things that he wanted were not entirely consistent.
Spending on some domestic programs was
reduced. These reductions slowed the rate o[ growth
of federal spend ing on these programs but did not
actually decrease the spending. Military spending

The Machinery of Economic Policy Maldng
was sharply in creased. The money supply was held
under control in order to combat inflation (at the
price of allowing interest rates to rise). Finally, and
most important, there were sharp across-the-board
cuts in personal income taxes, but for many people
these cuts were more than offset by increases in
Social Security taxes.
The effect of lowering taxes while increasing
spending was to stimulate the economy (by pumping
more money into it) and to create large deficits. The
stimul ated economy resulted in a drop in the unemployment rate and a rise in busin ess activity. The
large deficits increased dramatica lly the size of the
national debt. The effects of the tax cuts on produ ctivity and investment were hard to estimate and
remain a matter of co ntroversy.
John Maynard Keynes, had he been alive, would
have been startled. A conservative presid ent (aided,
of course, by Congress) created a ma ss ive budget
defi cit that helped reduce unemployment- just as
Keynes, a liberal, might have recommended.

The Machinery of Econonlic
Policy Making
Even if the president knew exactly the right thing to
do, he would still have to find some way of doing it.
In our government that is no easy ta sk. The ma chinery for making decisions about eco nomic matters is
complex and not under the president's full control.
Within the executive branch three people other than
the president are of special importance. Sometimes

Milton Friedman

John May nard Keynes

called the troika,* these are the chairman of the
Council of Economic Advisers (CEA), the director of
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and
the secretary of the treasury.
The CEA, composed of three professional economists plus a small staff, has existed since 1946. In
theory it is an impartial group of experts responsible
for forecasting economic trends, analyzing economic
issues, and helping prepare the economic report that
the pres ident submits to Congress each year. Though
quite professional in tone, the CEA is not exactly
impartia l in practice, since each president picks
members sympathetic to his point of view. Kennedy
picked Keynesians; Reaga n picked supply-siders and
monetarists. But whatever its philosophical tilt, the
CEA is seen by other executive agencies as the advocate of the opinion of professional economists, who
despite their differences ge nerally tend to favor
reliance on the market.
The OMB was originally the Bureau of the Budget.
which was created in 1921 and made part of the
executive office of the president in 1939; in 19 70 it
was renamed the Office of Management and Budget.
Its chief function is to prepare estimates of the
amount that will be spent by fed eral agencies, to
negotiate with other departments over the size of
their budgets, and to make certain (insofar as it can)
that the legislative proposals of these other departments are in accord with the president's program. Of
late it has acquired something of a split perso nality; it
is in part an expert, nonpartisan agency that analyzes

*From the Russian word for a carriage pulled by three horses.

John Kenneth Galbraith

Arthur B. Laffer

499

500

Chapter 18

Ecol1om ic Policy

HOW THINGS WORK
The Federal Reserve Board
The Tools by Which the Fed Implements Its
Monetary Policy
1. Buying and selling federal government securities
(bonds, Treasury notes, and othe r pieces of paper
that constitute govern ment IOUs) . Wh en the Fed
buys securities, it in effect puts more money into
circulation and takes secu rit ies out of ci rculation .
With more mo ney around, interest rates tend to
d rop, and more money is borrowed and spent.
When the Fed sel ls government secu rit ies, it in
effect takes money out of circulation, causing
interest rates to ri se and making borrowing more
d iff icu lt.
2. Regulating the amount of money that a member
bank must keep in hand as reserves to back up
the customer deposits it is holding. A bank lends
out most of the money deposited with it . If the
Fed says that it must keep in reserve a larger fraction of its deposits, then the amount that it can
lend drops, loans become harder to obta in, and
interest rates rise.
3. Changing the interest charged banks that want
to borrow money f rom the Fed eral Reserve
Syst em . Banks bo rrow f rom the Fed to cover

spending and budget patterns and in part an activist.
partisan organization that tries to get the president's
wishes carried out by the bureaucracy.
The secretary of the treasury is often close to or
drawn from the world of business and fin a nce and is
expected to argue the point of view of the financial
community. (S ince its members do not always agree,
this is not always easy.) The secretary prov ides estimates of the revenue that the govern men t ca n expect
from existi ng taxes and what will be the result of
changin g tax laws. He or she represents the United
States in its dealings with the top bankers a nd
finance ministers of other nations.
A good deal of pulling and ha uling takes place
among members of the troika, but if that were the
extent of the problem, presidential leadership would be

short-term needs. The interest that the Fed
charges for this is called the discount rate . The Fed
can raise o r lower that rate; this will have an
effect, though usually rather small, on how much
money the banks w ill lend .
Federal Reserve Board (7 members)
• Determ ines how many government securities will
be bought or sold by regional and member banks.
• Determines interest rates to be charged by region al banks and amount of money member banks
must keep in reserve in regional ban ks.
Regional Federal Reserve Banks (12)
• Buy and sell government securities.
• Loan mon ey to member banks.
• Keep pe rcentage of holdings for member ban ks.
Member Banks (6,000)
• Buy and sell government securit ies .
• May borrow money from reg ional banks.
• M ust keep percentage of hold ings in regional banks.
• Interest rates paid to re gional banks determine
interest rates charged fo r bus iness and personal
loans and infl uence all bank interest rates.

fairly easy. The problem is far more complex. One study
found 132 separate government bureaus engaged in
formu lating economic policy. They regulate business,
make loans, and supply subsidies. For example, as
foreign trade becomes increasingly important to this
country. the secretary of state (among many others)
acquires an interest in economic policy. One-third of
corporate profits come from overseas investments, and
one-fourth of farm output is sold abroad.

The Fed
Among the most important of these other agencies
is the board of governors of the Federal Reserve System (the "Fed") . Its seven members are appOinted by
the president, with the consent of the Senate, for
fourteen-year, nonrenewable terms a nd may not be

The Mac hinery of Econom ic Po licy Mald n9

removed except for cause. ( 0 member has been
removed since it was created in 19l3.) The chairman
serves for four years. In theory. and to some degree in
practice. th e Fed is ind ependent of both the pres ident
a nd Co ngress. Its most important fun ction is to reg ulate, inso far as it can, the supply of money (both in
circulation and in bank depos its) and the price of
money (in the form of interest rates). The Fed sets
moneta r y policy, that is. the effort to shape the
econo my by co ntrolling the amo unt of money and
bank deposits and the interest rates charged for
money. The box on page 500 shows how the Fed does
this. In 2001, it lowered interest rates eleven times in
ord er to help reduce the recession.
Just how independent the Fed is ca n be a matter of
dispute. During the 1980 election Fed policies helped
keep interest rates at a high level, a circumstance
that did not benefit President Ca rter's reelection bid.
On the other hand, whenever a president is determined to change monetar y policy. he usually can do
so. For exa mple. the term of Fed cha irma n Arthur F.
Burns. appointed by President Nixon. ca me up for
renewal in 1978. President Ca rter. seekin g to infl uence Burns's decisions, held out the prospect of reappointing him chairman. When Burns ba lked, he was
passed over, and G. Will iam Mi ll er wa s a ppOinted in
his stead. Presidents Truman, John so n, and Nixon
were all able to obtain cha nges in monetary policy.
When Alan Greenspan, a co nservative. became Fed
chairman in 1987 und er Presiden t Reagan , he was
so successful in curbing inflation that he was reappointed by President Clinton, a Democrat.

Congress
The most important part of the economic policy
making machinery, of course, is Congress. It must
approve all taxes and almost all expenditures; there
can be no wage or price controls without its consent;
and it has the ability to alter the po licy of the nominally ind ependent Federal Reserve Board by threaten ing to pass laws that wou ld reduce its powers. And
Co ngress itself is fragmented, with great in fluence
wielded by the members of key committees, especially the Ho use and Senate Budget Committees, the
House and Senate Appropri ations Committees, the
House Ways and Means Committee. a nd the Senate
Finance Committee. The decisions Co ngress makes
about how high taxes should be and how much
mon ey the government shou ld spe nd create the
nation's fi scal policy.

Alan Greenspan, chairman oj the Federal Reserve Board.
In sum, no matter what economic theory the president may have, if he is to put that theory into effect
he needs the assistance of many agencies within the
exec utive branch , such independent agencies as the
Federal Reserve Board, and the various committees
of Congress. Though members of the executive and
legislative branc hes are uni ted by their common
des ire to get reelected (and thus have a common
interest in producing sound eco nomi c growth), each
part of this system may also be infl uenced by different economic theories and w ill be motivated by the
claims of interest groups.
The effect of these interest gro up cl aims is clearly
shown in the debate over trade restriction. Us ually
the economic health of the nation affects everyone in
pretty much the same way-we are all hurt by inflation or helped by stable prices; the incomes of all of
us tend to grow (or remain stag nant) together. In
these circumstances the politics of economic health
is maj oritarian.
Suppose, however, that most of us are doing pretty
well but that the people in a few industries or occupations are suffering. That is sometimes the result of foreign competition. In many coun tries labor costs are
much lower than they a re in the United States. That
means that these countries can ship to American
buyers goods- su ch as shoes, textiles, and beef- that
sell at much lower prices than America n producers

mone tary policy

Managing th e economy by
altering t he supply of money and interest rates.
fi scal policy Managing the eco nomy by th e
use of ta x and spend ing law s.

501

502

Chapter 18

Economic Policy

all of Latin America. the critics of free trade opposed
the idea. and it di ed. Thi s is a good exa mple of how
people who bear the costs of a policy a re often much
more effective in influencing the votes on it than are
those who sta nd to benefit from it.
Not on ly has the United States not extended the
NAFTA idea to other co untries, but it ha s done things
that reward certain econom ic interest groups. Even
though Republicans tend to su pport free trade, President George W. Bush imposed sharp in creases in the
taxes that must be paid on imported steel. The reason
is not hard to fmd. Steel is produced in certain states,
such as Ohio and Pennsylvania. that the president
wanted to carry in 2004.

Spending Money
If only the economic health of the nation mattered.

Union members demonstrate against the Nort h A m erican
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) that was passed in 1993.

can afford to charge. By contrast, if the price of a
product is based chiel1y on having advanced technology rather than low labor costs, American manufacturers can beat almost any foreign competitor.
When Congress passes laws governing foreign
trade, it is responding to interest group politics.
Industries that find it easy to sell American products
abroad want free trade-that is, they want no taxes
or restrictions on internationa l exchanges. Industries that find it hard to compete with foreign imports
oppose free trade- that is, they want tariffs a nd
other limitations on imports.
When the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) was passed by Cong ress in 1993, the free
traders won. and tariffs on our commerce with Ca nada a nd Mexico were largely abolished. But when the
govern ment later su ggested creati ng free trade with

then majoritarian politics would dominate. and the
president and Congress would both work to improve
economic conditions. Although they sti ll might work
at cross-purposes beca use they held to different economic theories, the goal would be the sa me.
But the government must a lso respon d to the
demands of voters and interest groups. Wh ile these
dema nd s are no less legitimate than the voters' genera l interest in eco nomic health. they produce not
majoritarian but client a nd interest group politics.
The sources of this conOict can be seen in public
opinion polls. Voters conSistently say that they want
a balanced budget and lower government spending.
They believe that the government spends too much and
that if it wa nted to, it could cut spending. When the
government runs a deficit, the reason in the voters' eyes
is that it is spending too much, not that it is taxing too
little. But these same polls show that the voters believe
that the government should spend more on education,
homelessness, child care, and crime control.
The voters are not irrational, thinking that they
ca n have more spending and less spending simultaneously. Nor are they hypocrites, pretending to want
less spending overall but more spendin g for particular programs. They are simply expressin g a variety of
concerns. They want a limited government with no
deficit; they also want good schools, cleaner air, better hea lth care, and less crime. They believe that a
fru ga l government co uld deliver what they want by
cutting out waste. They may be wrong about that
belief, but it is not obviously silly.

The Budget
What this means for the government is easy to
imagine. Politicians have an incentive to make two
kinds of appeals: The first is, "Vote for me and I will
keep government spending down and cut the deficit. "
The second is, "Vote for me and I will make certain
that your favorite program gets more money. " Some
people will vote for the candidate because of the first
appeal; some will vote for him or her because of the
second. But acting on these two appeals is clearly
going to lead to inconsistent policies. These inconsistencies become evident in the budget.

...;

The Budget

A budget is a document that announces how much
the government will collect in taxes and spend in revenues and how those expenditures will be allocated
among various programs. (Each budget covers a
fi scal year, which runs from October 1 of one year
through September 30 of the next. A fiscal year is
named after the year in which it ends: thus, "fiscal
2006" or "FY 2006" means the year ending on
September 30, 2006.
In theory the federal budget should be based on
first deciding how much money the government is
going to spend and th en allocating that money
among different programs and agencies. That is the
way a household makes up its budget: "We have this
much in the paycheck, and so we will spend X dollars
on rent, Y dollars on food, and Z dollars on clothing,
and what's left over on entertainment. If the amount
of the paycheck goes down, we will cut something
out- probably entertainment."
In fact the federal budget is a list of everything the
government is going to spend money on, with only
slight regard (sometimes no regard at aU) for how
much money is available to be spent. Instead of being
a way of allocating money to be spent on various purposes, it is a way of adding Lip what is being spent.
Indeed. there was no federal budget at all before
1921 , and there was no unified presidential budget
until the 1930s. Even after the president began submitting a single budget, the committees of Congress
acted on it separately, adding to or subtracting from
the amounts he proposed. (Usually they followed his
lead, but they were certainly free to depart from it as
they wished.) If one committee wanted to spend
more on housing, no effort was made to take that
amount away from the committee that was spending

money on health (in fact, there was no machinery for
making such an effort).
The Congressional Budget Act of 1974 changed
this somewhat. Now after the president submits his
budget in February, two budget committees- one in
the House, one in the Senate- study his overa ll package and obtain an analysis of it from the Congressional Budget Office (CBO). Each committee then
submits to its house a budget resolution that proposes a total budget ceiling and a ceiling for each of
several spending areas (such as health or defense) .
Each May Congress is supposed to adopt, with some
modifications, these budget resolutions, intending
them to be targets to guide the work of each legislative committee as it decides what shou ld be spent in its
area. During the summer Congress then takes up the
specific appropriations bills, informing its members as
it goes along whether or not the spending proposed in
these bills conforms to the May budget resolution. The
object, obviously, is to impose some discipline on the
various committees. After each committee approves
its appropriations bill and Congress passes it, it goes to
the president for his signature.
These appropriations bills, however, can rarely
make big changes in government spending. About
two-thirds of what the government spends is mandatory- that is, the money goes to people who are entitled to it. En title me n ts include Social Security and
Medicare payments, veterans' benellts, food stamps,
and money the government owes investors who have
bought Treasury bonds (that is, the interest on the
national debt). In theory the government could
change these entitlements by, for example, cutting
Social Security payments. but that would be a political disaster. In reality the government can change
only about one-third of federa l spending in any
year.

budge t

A document that states tax collections,
spending levels, and the allocation of spending
among purposes.

fiscal year

For the federal government, October 1 through the following September 30.
budget resolution A congressional decis io n
t hat states the maxim um amount of mon ey
t he government shou ld spend .
entitlements A claim for government funds
t hat cannot be changed without vi o lating the
rights of t he cla imant.

50 3

504

Chapter 18

Figure 18.3
-

Economic Policy

History of the National Debt
Gross nat io nal debt

Federal spe nding

-

6,800
6,400
6,000
5,600
5,200
4,800
4,400

Vl

§

4,000

:0 3,600
c:

:; 3,200

~

o

2,800
2,400
2,000
1,600
1,200
800
400

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000 2002

Source. Economic Reports of the President, va rious yea rs.

There is a big loophole in the current bud get
process: nothing in the process requires Co ngress to
tighten the government's financial belt. It can pass a
bud get resolu tion a uthorizing spendin g that is more
or less tha n what th e presid en t h as proposed.
No netheless, the process has made a difference.
Congress is now co nscious of how its spending decisions match up with estimates of tax revenues.
When Pres id ent Reaga n took orfice, h e and his
allies in Co ngress took adva ntage of th e Congressional Budget Act to star t the controversia l process of
cutting federal spending. The Ho use a nd Senate
budget committees, with the preS ident's support,
used the first bud get resolution in May 198 1 not simply to set a bud get ceiling that, as in the past, looked
pretty much like the prev ious yea r's bud get but to
direct each committee of Co ngress to make CLl tssometimes deep cuts- in the prog rams for which it
was responsible. These cuts were to be made in the
authorization legislation (see Chapter 15 ) as well as
in the appropriations.
The object was to get members of Congress to vote
for a total package of cuts before they co uld vote on

any particular cut. Republica n control of the Senate
a nd an alliance between Republicans a nd co nservative southern Democrats in the House allowed this
strategy to succeed. The first budget resolution ordered
Senate a nd House conmlittees to reduce federa l spending during fiscal 1982 by about $36 billion- less than
th e president had first asked, but a large sum nonetheless. Then the individual COl1illlittees set to work trying
to find ways of making these cuts.
Note how the procedures used by Congress can
a ffect th e policies adopted by Congress. If the Reagan
pl a n had been submitted in the old piecemeal way, it
is unlikely that cuts of this size would have occurred
in so short a tim e, or at a ll . The reason is not th at
Congress wo uld have wa nted to ignore the presid ent
but that. then as now, Congress refl ects public opinion on economic policy. As sta ted at the beginning of
the ch apter, th e publi c wa nts less total federal spend ing but more money spent on specific federa l programs. Thu s. if yo u a llow the public or Congress to
vote first on specific program s, spendin g is bound to
rise. But if you require Con gress to vote first on a
bud get ceiling. then (unl ess it changes its mind as it
goes al ong) total spending will go down. and tough
choices will h ave to be made about the component
pa rts of the budget.
Tha t, at least, is the theory. It worked once. in
198 1, but it did not work very well thereafter. During
the rest of the Reagan years the bud get process broke
down in the warfare between the presiden t a nd Co ngress. Presid en t Reaga n represented the part of public opini on tha t wa nted less government spending in
genera l: most members of Co ngress represented the
part of public opinion that wa nted more spending on
particula r prog ra ms. The result was a stalemate. It
continued with Presidents Clinton a nd both the elder
and yo un ger Bush. In 2002 no bud get resolution
was adopted by Co ngress, a nd so the money struggle
was left to the appropri ation s committees.

*

Reducing Spending

Beca use the 1974 Congress iona l Budget Act did not
a utomatically lead to spending cuts , people co ncerned about the growing federa l deficit decided to
find ways to put a cap on spending. The fir st such cap
was the Bala nced Budget Act of 1985 , now ca ll ed
the Gra mm-Rudm a n Act after two of its sponso rs,
Senators Phil Gra mm (R-Tex.) and Warren Rudma n

505

Levying Taxes
(R-N.H.). The law required that each year from 1986
to 1991 th e budget would automatically be cut un til
the federal deficit had disappeared. What made the
cuts automatic, its authors hoped, was a provision in
the bill, called a sequester, that required across-theboard percentage cuts in all federal programs (except
for entitl ements) if the president and Congress failed
to agree on a total spend ing level that met the law's
targets. No one liked this plan , but it seemed necessa ry. Senator Rudman called it a "bad idea whose
time has come."
But the plan failed. By various devices that people
began to ca ll "smoke and mirrors, " Congress a nd the
president found ways to get new spendin g that was
higher than the targeted amounts. By 1990 it was
evid ent that a new strategy was needed if the government was going to help eliminate the delkit.
That strategy had two parts. First, Congress voted
for a tax increase. Second, the Budget Enforcement
Act of 1990 imposed a cap on discretionary (that is,
nonentitlement) spending. As long as the president
a nd Congress stay under that cap, they can change
the amount of money they spend. The law does not
limi t mandatory spending, but it does impose a payas-yo u-go approach. If Co ngress increases spending
in one program, it must either cut spending in a nother program or raise taxes. The combined effect of a
spending cap and a pay-as-you-go policy helped
restrain federal spending. and to that extent the government contributed to eliminating the defi cit.

1:.

Levying Taxes

Tax policy rel1ects a mixture of majoritarian politics
("What is a 'fa ir' tax law?") and client politics (" How
mu ch is in it for me?"). In the United States a fair tax
law has generally been viewed as one that keeps the
overall tax burden rather low, requires everyone to
pay so mething, and requires the better-off to pay at a
higher rate than the less-well-off. The law, in short,
was viewed as good if it imposed modest burdens,
prevented cheating, and was mildly progressive.
American s have had their first goa l satisfied. The
tax burden in the United States is lower than it is in
most other democratic nations (see Figure 18.5).
There is some evidence that they have also had their
second goal met-there is reaso n to believe that
Americans evade their income taxes less than do citizens of, say, France or Italy. (That is one reason why

Figure 18.4

-

When Will t he Crunch Come? Projections of
the Growth in Federal Spending
Socia l Sec urity

-

Medicare

800

V;
c
.Q

600

:0
c

'"
J§

400

0
0

200

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Source: Congressiona l Budget Offi ce, Th e Economic and Budget Outlook:
An Update (J uly 1, 1999).

many nations rely more on sales taxes than we dothey are harder to evade.) Just how progressive our
tax rates are is a matter of dispute: to determine
whether the rich really pay at higher rates than the
poor, one h as to know not on ly the official rates but
also the effect of dedu ctions, exemptions, and exclusions (that is, of loopholes).
Keeping the burden low and the cheating at a
minimum are examples of majorita rian politics:
most people benefit, most people pay. The loopholes,
however, are another matter- all ma nner of special
interests can get some special benefit from the tax
law that the rest of us must pay for but, given the
comp lexity of the law, rarely notice. Loopholes are
client po litics par excellence.
Beca use of that. hardly any scholars believed that
tax reform (dra matically redUCing the loopholes) was
politically possible. Every interest that benefited from
a loophole-and these incl uded not just corporations
but universities, museums, states, cities, and investors- would lobby vigorously to protect it.

sequester

Automat ic spend ing cuts.

Balanced Budget
J!~endment Debated
WASHTNGTON
. Congress began toda
tlve bUdget process on: ~ search for a more effeccheck on federa l 'spend' Jat would keep a tighter
deficits. One idea . . .
mg and prevent future

MEMORANDUM
To: Representative Ellen Brown
From: Russel Burgos, legislative assistant
The most far-reaching proposal before the House is a constitutional amendment that
would require Congress to pass a balanced budget every year (except in wartime or
when three-fifths of the members believed that a deficit was needed). What is your
view on this?
Arguments for:
1. A constitutional amendment is the only way to compel Congress to keep the
budget in balance. Left to its own devices, Congress will adopt spending caps that
are easy for it to evade.
2. A balanced budget amendment would allow for deficit spending when there was a
compelling need .
3. Thirty-two states have called for such an amendment.
Arguments against:
1. A constitutional amendment would be in effective. If Congress defied the
amendment by passing an unbalanced budget, there would be no authority that
could compel it to change its mind .
2. A constitutional amendment does not take into account that passing a balanced
budget requires a guess about tax revenues in the coming year and what
emergency spending bills (for example, to deal with hurricanes) might be needed.
Your decision:

Favor amendment _ _ _
Oppose amendment _ __

Levying Taxes
Nevertheless, in 1986 a sweeping tax reform act
was passed. Many of the most cherished loopholes
were closed or reduced. What happened? It is as if
scientists who had proved that a bumb lebee cou ld
not fly got stung by a flying bumb lebee.

The Rise of the Income Tax
To understand what happened in 1986, one must
first understand the political history of taxation in
the United States. Until almost the end of the nineteenth century, there was no federal income tax
(except for a brief period during the Civil War) . The
money that the government needed came mostly
from tariffs (that is, taxes on goods imported into this
country). And when Congress did enact a peacetime
income tax, the Supreme Court in 1895 struck it
down as unconstitutional.' 1 To change this, Congress proposed, and in 1913 the states ratified, the
Sixteenth Amendment, which authorized such a tax.
For the next forty years or so tax rates tended to go
up during wartime and down during peacetime (see
Figure 18.6). The rates were progressive-that is, the
wealthiest individuals paid at a higher rate than the
less affluent. For example, during World War II
incomes in the highest bracket were taxed at a rate of
94 percent. (The key tax rate is ca ll ed by economists
the "marginal rate." This is the percentage of the last
do llar that you earn that must be paid out in taxes.)
An income tax offers the opportunity for majoritarian politics to become class politics. The majority
of the citizenry earn average incomes and control
most of the votes. In theory there is nothing to prevent the mass of peop le from voting for legislators
who will tax only the rich, who, as a minority, wil l
always be outvoted. During the early decades of this
century, that is exactly what the rich feared would
happen. Since the highest marg inal tax rate was
94 percent, you might think that that is in fact what
did happen.
You would be wrong. Offsetting the high rates
were the deductions, exemptions, and exclusions by
which people could shelter some of their income
from taxation. These loopholes were avai lable for
everyone, but they particularly helped the well-off.
In effect a political compromise was reached during
the first half of the twentieth century. The terms
were these: the well-off, generally represented by the
Repub lican party, would drop their bitter opposition
to high marginal rates provided that the less-well -off,
genera lly represented by the Democratic party,

Figure 18.5

507

Tax Burdens in Democratic Nations
(Taxes as a Percentage of Income of a
Family with Two Children)

Denmark

30.5%

Turkey

30.0%

Poland
Fin land
Belgium • • • • • • • •
Sweden
Germany
Norway
Netherlands
Greece
Canada
Australia _

14.7%

France _

14.2%

Italy _

12.2%

Japan _

11.9%

UN ITED STATES _

11.3%

United Kingdom _

10 .8%

Spain _

10.4%

Swi tzerland _

8 .6%

Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2003, Table 1344.

would support a large number of loopholes. The
Democrats (or more accurately, the liberals) were
willing to accept this compromise because they
feared that if they insisted on high rates with no
loopholes, the eco nomy would suffer as people and
businesses lost their incentive to save and invest.
For at least thirty years after the adoption of the
income tax in 1913, only a sma ll number of highincome people paid any significant amount in federal income taxes. The average citizen paid very little in
such taxes until World War II. After the war, taxes
did not fall to their prewar levels.
Most people did not complain too much , because
they, too, benefited greatly from the loopholes. They
cou ld deduct from their taxable income the interest

50 8

Chapter 18

Figure 18.6

Economic Policy

Federal Taxes on Income, Top Percentage Rates, 1913- 2002
Indivi dual

World
Wa r I

World
War II

Korean
War

Corporate
Vietnam War

100
90
80
70

'"

60

OJ)

2c

50

a..

40

'"u0;

30
20
10

1920

Wilson

1930

Coolidge Hoover
Hard ing

1940

1950

Rooseve lt

Truman

1960

1970

I

1980

Eisenhower
Johnson Ni xon
Carter
Kennedy
Ford

1990

Reagan

Bush
the
elder

2000

J

Cli nton
Bush
the
you nger

Source: Updated f rom Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report (Septembe r 18, 1993), 2488.

they paid on their home mortgages, the state and
local taxes they paid , much of what they paid in
medical insurance premiums , and the interest they
paid on consumer loans (such as those used to buy
automobiles). On the eve of the Tax Reform Act of
1986, an opinion poll showed that more people
favored sma ll cuts in tax rates coupled with many
large deductions than favored big cuts in tax rates
coupled with fewer and smaller deductions. 12
Interest groups organized around each loophole.
Home builders organized to support the mortgageinterest deduction; universities supported the charitable-contribution deduction; insurance companies
supported the deduction for medical insurance premiums; and automakers supported the deduction for
interest on consumer loans.
In addition to these well-known loopholes there
were countless others, not so well known and involving
much less money, that were defended and enlarged
through the efforts of other interest groups: for
instance, oil companies supported the deduction for

drilling costs, heavy industry supported the investment
tax credit, and real estate developers supported special
tax write-offs for apartment and office buiJdings.
Until 1986 the typical tax fight was less about
rates than about deductions. Rates were important,
but not as important as tax loopho les. "Loophole politics" was client poli tics. When client groups pressed
for benefits. they cou ld take advantage of the decentra lized structure of Congress to find well-placed
advocates who could advance these interests
through low-visibility bargaining. [n effect these
groups were getting a subsidy from the federal government equa l to the amount of the tax break. However, the tax break was even better than a subsidy,
because it did not have to be voted on every year as
part of an appropriations bill: once part of the tax
code, it lasted [or a long time, and given the length
and complexity of that code, scarcely anyone would
notice it was there.
Many of these loopholes could be justified by arguments about economic growth. Low tax rates on a

Summary

certain kind of investment encouraged more investment of that kind. Deductions for mortgage interest
and property taxes encouraged people to own their
own homes and boosted the construction industry.
Then the Tax Reform Act of 1986 turned the
decades-old compromise on its head: instead of high
rates with big deductions, we got low rates with
much smaller deductions. The big gainers were individuals; the big losers were businesses.
But soon the old system bega n to reassert itself'.
Not long after the 1986 bill became law, tax rates
started to go up again, th is time with far fewer of the
deductions that had once made it easy for affluent
citizens to keep their rates low. In 1990 President
Bush, after having campaigned on the slogan "Read
my lips, no new taxes, " signed a tax increase. The top
rate was 31 percent. In 1993 President Clinton pro-

'*
T

posed another tax increase. one that would ra ise the
top rate to over 39 percent (it had been 28 percent in
1986) and make most Social Security benefits taxable for upper-income retirees. His bill narrowly
passed by a vote of 218 to 216 in the Ho use. a vote of
51 to 50 in the Senate, with Vice Pres ident AI Gore
casting the deciding vote. Not a single Republican
voted for it. It was the fir st time since 1945 that the
majority party in Congress had passed a major bill
without one vote [rom the minority party.
When President George W. Bush got his tax cut
plan through Congress in 2002, many Democrats as
well as most Republicans voted for it. The next issue
is clear: should the tax cuts, now expiring at the end
of 2010. be made permanent? There is no point in
guessing what wi ll happen; events more than personalities will determine the outcome.

SUMMARY

here are three economic fa ctors that make a difference to voters; the policies for each are formulated by a distinctive type of policy-making. The first
is the economic health of the nation, the second the
amount and kinds of government spendin g, and the
third the level and distribution of taxes.
National economic health has powerful effects on
the outcome of elections, as much through people's

perception of national conditions as from their worries about their own ilnances. The politics of inflation, unemployment, and economic growth tend to
be majoritarian. The pres ident is held respo nsibl e for
national cond itions. But he must meet that responsibility by using imperfect eco nomic theories to manage clumsy government tools contro lled by divided
political a uthori ties.

509

510

Chapter 18

Economic Policy

When economic ill health occurs in some industries and places but not others (as a resu lt of such
forces as foreign competition) . the politics of economic health are shaped by interest group politics.
Firms that import foreign products or sell to foreign
nations try to avoid trade restrictions. while fIrms
and unions hurt by foreign competition try to impose
such restrictions.
The amount of spending is theoretically determined by the budget. but in fact the nation has no
meaningful budget. Instead the president and Congress struggle over particular spending bills whose

amounts reflect interest group and client pressures.
In the 1980s those pressures. coupled with a large
tax cut. led to a sharp increase in the size of the federa l debt.
The general shape of federal tax legislation is
determined by majoritarian politiCS. but the specific
provisions (especially the deductions. exemptions.
and exclusions) are the result of client group politics. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 was a remarkab le
example of the reassertion of majoritarian politics
over client group pressures made possible by policy
entrepreneurs and political incentives.

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?
1. Who in the federal government can make our

economy strong?
Nobody. The preSident. the Congress. the Federal
Reserve Board. and countless small agencies play a
role. And opinions as to what is the correct course of

action (cut or increase taxes. decrease or increase regulations. spend more or less money) are deeply divided. The party that controls the White House usually
must take the blame if the economy is in bad shape.
but it is limited in what it can do to make it better.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. Why does the federal government ever have a
budget deficit?
It is not because politicians like deficits. it is because
events may cause them while leaders disagree over
how to fix them. Since the 1930s we have had deficits
whenever the economy went into a depression or we
had to take part in a war. In fact. a lot of things the

government buys. such as new buildings and military
supplies. ought to be considered as investments to be
paid for over time. just as when private citizens bu y
cars and houses. And when the deficit goes up. some
politicians will want to cut it by raising taxes while
others will prefer cutting spending.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

Internal Revenue Service: www.irs.gov

Tax Foundation: www.taxfoundation.org

SUGGESTED READINGS
Birnbaum. Jeffrey H.. a nd Alan S. Murray. SllOlVdowl1 at Gllcci
Guleil. New York: Random House. ]987. Lively journalistic
account of the passage of t he Tax Reform Act of 1986.
Kiewiet. D. Roderick. Macroeco nomics and Micropolitics. Ch icago:
Un iversity of Chi cago Press. 1983. Argues that citizens vote
on the basis of their estimate of national economic conditions
as well as their own financial circumstances.
Sa muelson. Robert J. The Good LiJe and Its Discolltellts. New York:
Times Books/Random House. 1995. A readable. intelligen t
account of American economic life si nce the Second World War.
Schick. Allen. The Federal Blldget. Washington. D.C.: Brookings
Tnstitution. 1995. Excell ent overview of how Washington a llocates money.

Sh laes. Amity. Til e Greedy Halld. ew York: Random House. 1999.
Spirited attack on federal tax policy.
Stein. Herbert. and Murray Foss. Th e New Illllstrated GlIide to the
Americall Ecollomy. 3rd ed. Washington. D.C.: American Enterprise In stitute. 1999. A vivid coll ection of graphs. all clearly
ex plained. that describes the American economy and government spending from the 1950s through the 1990s.
Tufte. Edward R. Political Control oj the ECOIIOIllY· Princeton. .J.:
Prin ceton University Press. 1978. Argues that there is a "political business cycl e" ca used by politicians' trying to stimulate
the eco nomy just before an election.

CHAPTER

19

Social Welfare

Social Welfare in the United States
Majoritarian Welfare Programs: Social
Security and Medicare • Reforming
Majoritarian Welfare Programs • Client
Welfare Programs: Aid to Families with
Dependent Children

Two Kinds of Welfare Politics
Majoritarian Politics •

Client Politics

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

2.

How, if at all, have Americans' views
of government's responsibility to
help the "deserving poor" changed
over time?
Why are some government social welfare programs politically protected
while others are politically imperiled?

T:

2.

What does the Constitution mean by
"promote the general Welfare"?
Should religious groups be eligible
to administer some federal welfare
programs?

here are two kinds of welfare programs in the United States: those that
benefit most or all of the people and those that help only a small number of them. In the ftrst category are Social Security and Medicare, programs
that provide retirement benefits or medica l assistance to almost every citizen
who has reached a certain age. In the second are programs such as Medicaid
and Food Stamps that offer help only to people with low incomes.
Legally the difference between the two kinds of programs is that the first
have no means test (that is. they are available to everyone without regard to
income) while the second are means tested (that is, you must fall below a certain income level to enjoy them). Po li tically the programs differ in how they
get money from the government. The first kinri of welfare program represents majoritarian politics: nearly everyone benefits, nearly everyone
pays. The second kind represents client politics: a (relatively) few number
of people benefit, but alm ost everyone pays. The bi ggest prob lem facing
majoritarian welfare programs is their cost: who will pay, and how much
will they pay? The biggest problem facing client-oriented programs is their
legitimacy: who should benefit, and how should they be served?
Thi s political difference between these programs has a huge impact on
how the government acts in regard to them. Social Security and Medicare
are sacrosanct. The thought of making any changes that might lower the
benellts these programs pay is so politically risky that most po li ticians never
even discuss them. When programs such as these run into trouble because
of rising expenses (Medicare is in deep trouble today, and Social Security will
be in even deeper troub le in a few decades). politicians scramble to look for
ways of maintaining benefits while hiding the rising costs or postponing
dealing with them. As we sh all see later in this ch apter, there has been a
sharp growth in the proportion of people who are retired and are thus entitled to Social Security and Medica re. To keep benefits fl owing to these individuals, people who are not retired will have to pay more and more in taxes.
No politician wants to raise taxes or cut benefits, so they adopt a variety of
halfhearted measures (like slow ly increasing the age at which people can get
these benefits) designed to postpone the tough decisions until they are out of
office. Today, however, some leaders in each party are calling for more fundamental and far-reach ing reforms. Shortly after his reelection in 2004,
President George W. Bush proposed allowing individuals to voluntarily invest
a portion of their Social Security taxes in personal retirement accounts. The
issue became a focus of political debate in the l09th Congress.

512

Soci al Welfare in the United States

Client-based welfare programs-those that are
means tested-are a very different matter. Like many
other client-based programs, their political appeal
changes as popular opinion about them changes.
Take the old Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC) program. When it was started in 1935, people thought of it as a way of helping poor women
whose husbands had been killed in war or had died in
mining accidents. The goal was to help these women
support their children, who had been made fatherless by death or disaster. Most people thought of
these women as the innocent victims of a tragedy. No
one thought that they would take AFDC for very
long. It was a program to help smooth things over for
them until they could remarry.
About thirty years later, however, the public's
opinion of AFDC had begun to change. People started to think that AFDC was paying money to women
who had never married and had no intention of marrying. The government, according to this view, was
subsidizing single-parent families, encouraging outof-wedlock births, and creating social dependency.
Moreover, some people thought that African Americans were taking undue advantage of the program.
(In fact, when this opinion emerged, African Americans were still a minority among AFDC recipients.)
From the mid-1960s through the mid-1990s these
views became stronger. AFDC had lost the legitimacy
it needed, as a client program, to survive politically.
Whenever a client program loses political legitimacy. the program is in trouble. Client politics depends
on the beneficiaries' being thought of as legitimate.
Almost any means-tested program risks losing its
political legitimacy, because some people will always
wonder whether the program itself causes people to
avoid working in order to claim the beneflts. Some
people think that about Food Stamps, the program
that gives low-income people l'ree stamps that they
can exchange for food. There have been a few publicized cases of people using food stamps to buy luxury
items. But no powerful opposition to the program has
developed, because in general the only thing the beneilciaries have in common is that they have low
incomes. Many Americans can imagine becoming
poor, and so they probably are willing to allow such a
program to operate as part of a government-supplied
safety net that might, someday, help them.
But AFDC was a different matter. Having to accept
AFDC was not something the typical taxpayer
thought would ever happen to him or her. Moreover,

the beneficiaries weren't just poor; some of them did
things-such as having babies without getting married- that most Americans tho ught were simply
wrong. The legitimacy of AFDC was thus in jeopardy,
because it either made possible or actually encouraged behavior that most Americans found improper.
As a result something happened to AFDC that almost
never happens to decades-old government programs:
it was abolished.
In this chapter we provide examples of both
majoritarian and client welfare programs and
describe how they have been reformed over the years.
There are far too many social welfare programs to
describe them all here; rather the main purpose of
this chapter is to explain the key features of the two
main kinds of programs.

Social Welfare in the United
States
Before analyzing how these programs came into
being, it is first necessary to understand that social
welfare policy in the United States is shaped by four
factors that make it different from what exists in
many other nations. First, Americans have generally
taken a more restrictive view of who is entitled to
government assistance. Second, America has been
slower than other countries to embrace the welfare
state. Third, we have insisted that the states (and to a
degree private enterprise) playa large role in running welfare programs. Fourth, nongovernmental
organizations playa large role in welfare.
The flrst distinctive feature of the American welfare state involves who beneflts. To Americans, who
benefits has been a question of who deserves to benefit. We have usually insisted that public support be
given on ly to those who cannot help themselves. But
what does it mean to say that a person cannot help
himself or herself? Surely a disabled, blind, elderly
woman deserted by her family cannot do much to
help herself, but would she still be deserving of public

majoritarian politics A policy in which almost
everybody benefits and almost everybody pays.
client politics A policy in which one small
group benefits and almost everybody pays.

513

514

Chapter 19

Social Welfare

Social welfare progrnms. once limited to the poor and the
unemployed. now may help handiC(lpped persolls as well.

aid were she merely disabled ? Or merely elderly? And
to what extent should we require that her family support her? As we shall see. American welfare policy
since the 19 30s has been fundamenta lly shaped by a
slow but steady change in how we have separated the
"deserving" from the "undeserving" poor.
That we have always thought this way may make
us forget that there are other ways of thinking about
welfare. The major alternative view is to ask not who
deserves help but what each person's "fair share" of
the national income is. Seen this way. the role of government is to take money from those who have a lot
and give it to those who have only a little. until each
person has. if not the same amount. then at least a
fair share. But defining a "fair share" is even more
difficult than defining the "deserving poor." Moreover. Americans have genera lly felt that giving
money to people who are a lready working. or who
could work if they chose to. is unfair. In some
nations-Sweden is an example- government policy
is aimed at redistributing income from better-off to
not-so-well-off persons. without regard to who
"deserves" the money.
Thus Americans base welfare po licy on the concept of "help for th e deserving poor" rather than
"redistribution to produce fair shares."l They have
done so. one suspects. because they believe that citi-

zens should be encouraged to be self-reliant. that
people who work hard will get what they deserve.
and that giving money to people who could help
themselves will produce a class of "welfare chiselers." If Americans believed that success at work was
a matter of luck rather than effort or was dictated by
forces over wh ich they had no control. they might
support a diJferent concept of welfare.
Moreover. we have always been a bit uneasy about
giving money to people. Though we recognize that
many people through no fau lt of their own cannot
buy groceries and thus need funds. we would prefer
that. to the extent possib le. people who deserve help
be given services (education. training. medical care)
rather than money. Throughout much of our h istory
our welfare policies have reflected a general philosophica l disposition in favor of providing services to
deserving persons.
The second striklng fact about American welfare
policy is how late in our history it arrived (at least at
the national level) compared to other nations. By
193.5. when Congress passed the Social Security Act.
at least twenty-two European nations already had similar programs. as did Australia and Japan. 2 Germany
was the first to create a nationwide socia l security program when it developed sickness and maternity insurance in 188 3. Six years later it added old-age
insurance and in 1927 unemployment insurance.
England offers perhaps the clearest contrast with
the United States. In 1908 a national system of oldage pensions was set up, followed three years later by
a plan for nationwide health and unemployment
insurance. 3 England had a parliamentary regime in
which a political party with liberal sentiments and a
large majority had come to power. With authority
concentrated in the hands of the prime minister and
h is cab inet. there was virtua lly no obstacle to instituting measures, such as welfare programs. that
commended themselves to party leaders on grounds
of either principle or party advantage. Furthermore.
the British Labour party was then beginn ing to
emerge. Though the party was still small (it had only
thirty seats in Parli ament in 1908). its leaders
included people who had been influential in formulating welfare programs that the leaders of the dominant Libera l party backed. And once these programs
were approved. they were in a lmost a ll cases nationa lly run: there were no state governments to which
authority had to be de legated or whose different
experiences had to be accommodated.

Social Welfare in the Un ited States
Moreover, the British in 1908 were beginning to
think in terms of social classes, to accept the notion
of an activist government, and to make welfare the
central political issue. Americans at that time a lso
had an activist leader, Theodore Roosevelt; there was
a progressive movement; and labor was well along in
its organizing drives. But the issues were defined differently in the United States. Progressives, or at least
most of them, emphasized the reform of the political
process-by eliminating corruption, by weakening
the parties, and by improving the civil service-and
attacked bigness by breaking up industrial trusts.
Though some progressives favored the creation of a
welfa re state, they were a distinct minority. Th ey had
few allies in organized labor (which was skeptical of
public welfare programs) and could n ot overcome
the general distrust of big government and the
strong preference for leaving matters of welfare in
state hands. In sum, what ordinary politics brought
to England in 1908- 1911, only the crisis politics of
19 35 would bring to the United States. But once
started, the programs grew. By 1983 almost onethird of a ll Americans received benefits from one or
more social welfare programs.
The third factor involves the degree to which federa lism has shaped nation al welfare policy. Since the
Constitution was silent on whether Co ngress had the
power to spend money on welfare a nd since powers
n ot delegated to Congress were reserved to the states,
it was not until the constitutional reinterpretation of
the 1930s (see Chapter 16) that it became clear that
the federal government could do anything in the a rea
of social policy. At the same time, federa lism meant
tha t any state so inclined could experiment with welfare programs. Between 19 23 and 19 33 thirty states
enacted some form of an old-age pension. By 1935
all but two states had adopted a "mother's pension"-a program whereby a widow with children
was given financial assistan ce, provided that she was
a "fit mother" who ran a "suitab le home." The poor
were given small doles by local governments, helped
by private charities, or placed in almshouses. Only
one state, Wisconsin, had an unemployment insura nce program.
Politically the state programs had a double-edged
effect: they provided opponents of a federal welfare
system with a n argument (the states were already
providing welfare assistance), but they also supplied
a lobby for federal financial assistance (state author-

ities would campaign for national legislation to help
them out). Some were later to say that the states were
the laboratories for experimentation in welfare policy. When the federal government entered the field in
1935, it did so in part by spending money through
the states, thereby encouraging the formation in the
states of a strong welfare bureaucracy whose later
claims would be difficult to ignore.
A fourth distinctive feature of welfare policy in the
United States is that much of it is administered via
grants and contracts to nongovernmental institutions,
both for-profit fIrms and nonprofIt organizations. For
example, many large national nonprofIt organizations, such as Big Brothers Big Sisters of America,
Youth Build, Jewish Federation, and Catholic Charities, have received large federal gra nts and long participated in the administration of federal social
programs. The 1996 law that abolished the Aid to
Families with Dependent Children program contained
a provision directing that religious nonprofit organizations, including small community-based groups, be
permitted to compete for government grants with
which to administer federal welfare-to-work and related poliCies. The latter provision, known as charitable
ch oice, enjoyed bipartisan support. The provision
prohibited religious organizations from using any
public funds for proselytizing, religious instruction, or
worship services, but also prohibited the government
from requiring them to remove religious art or iconography from buildings where social service delivery
programs funded in whole or in party by Washington
might be administered .
In 2001 Pres id ent George W. Bush's call to
expand the role of religious organizations in administering federal social programs led to a political
firestorm. 4 Some religiOUS conservatives demanded
that the Bush administration act to permit faithbased organizations to proselytize with public funds
and also allow them to hire only coreligionists if they
wished. But some civil libertarians so ught to reduce
or eliminate most existing public-private partnerships involving religious organizations.
charitable choice

Name given to four federal
laws passed in the late 1990s specifying the conditions under which nonprofit religious organizations could compete t o administer ce rtain
social servi ce delivery and we lfare programs.

5 15

516

Chapter 19

Social Welfare

Major Social Welfare P.r ograms
In surance, or "Contributory," Programs
Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance
(OASDI) Monthly payments to retired or disabled people and to surviving members of their
families. This program, popularly called Social
Security, is paid for by a payroll tax on employers
and employees. No means test.
Medicare Federal government pays for part of the
cost of medical care for retired or disabled people
covered by Social Security. Paid for by payroll taxes
on employees and employers. No means test.
Assistance, or "Noncontributory," Programs
Unemployment Insurance (UI) Weekly payments to workers who have been laid off and
cannot find work. Benefits and requirements
determined by states. Paid for by taxes on
employers. No means test.

Between 2002 and 2003 HHS and HUD gra nts to
faith-based groups increased 41 percent and 16 percent, respectively, and five federal agencies awarded

Figure 19.1

551, TANF, and Food Stamp Recipient s.

1980-2002
-

Food stamps

-

TANF

-

SS I

30

25

.l!l
c:

Cl!

20

0.
U
~

'0 15

'"c

.2

:;;:

10

5

=

~<==

1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992

1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

Source: U.S. Census Bureau , Sta tistical Abstract of the United States,

2003,371 ,374.

Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF) Payments to needy families with children. Replaced the old AFDC program. Partially
paid for by block grants from the federal government to the states. Means test.
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) Cash
payments to aged, blind, or disabled people
whose irlcome is below a certain amount. Paid
for from general federal revenues. Means test.
Food Stamps Vouchers, given to people whose
income is below a certain level, that can be used
to buy food at grocery stores. Paid for out of
general federal revenues. M eans test.
Medicaid Pays medical expenses of persons
receiving TANF or SSI payments. M eans test.
Earned Income Tax Credit Pays a cash subsidy
(or tax credit) to poor working families . Means test.

$ 1.1 7 billion to such organizations.5 Today, faithbased organizations figure ever more prominently in
the administration of welfare-to-work programs in
many big cities, from about 14 percent of all such
programs in Los Angeles to about 41 percent in
Philadelphia. 6 Fewer than one in ten of these urban
faith-based organizations give preferences to coreligionists in hiring, and virtually all accept beneficiaries without regard to religion. 7 This approach reflects
mass opinion on the subject: three-quarters want
government to help fund community-serving, faithbased organizations and deem them to be "more
caring and compassionate" than professional providers of the same services; but the same threefourths majority opposes government support for
faith-b ased programs that require beneficiaries to
"take part in religious practices" or "only hire people
of the same faith."s

Majoritarian lfi?/fare Programs:
Social Security and Medicare
Today, tens of millions of Americans receive food ,
money, or medicine through programs funded largely by the federal government (see Figure 19.1).
At the time the Great Depression began, in 1929 ,
the job of providing relief to needy people fell almost
entirely to state and local governments or to private

Social Welfare in the United States

In 1932, unemployed workers line up nt a soup kitchel1 duril1g the
Grent Depression.

cha rities, and even these sources were primarily co nce rned with widows , orphans, and the elderly.9
Hardly a ny state had a systematic program fo r supporting the unemployed , though ma ny states provided some kind of help if it was clea r that the person
was out o[ work through no fau lt of his or her own.
When the economy suddenly gro und to a near
sta nd still and the unemployment rate rose to include
one-fourth of the work force, private charities and
city relief programs nearly went ba nkrupt.
The election of 1932 produ ced an overwhelming
congress ional majority for the Democrats a nd placed
Fra nklin D. Roosevelt in the White House. Almost
immedi ately a number of emerge ncy measures were
adopted to cope with th e depression by supplying
fed era l cas h to ba il out state a nd local relief agencies
a nd by creating public works jobs under federal auspi ces. These measures were recognized as temporary
expedi ents, however, and were unsatisfactory to
those who believed that the federal government had
a permanent and major responsib ility for welfare.
Roosevelt created the Ca bin et Committee on Economic Security to cons ider long-term policies. The
committee drew heav ily on the experience of Europea n nations a nd on the ideas of various America n
scholars an d socia l workers, bu t it understood that it

wo uld have to adapt these proposals to the realities of
Ameri can politi cs. Chief among these was the widespread belief that any direct fed eral welfare progra m might be uncon stitutiona l. The Co nstitution
nowhere expli citly gave to Congress the authority to
set up an unemployment compensation or old-age
retirement program. And even if a welfare program
were con stitutional, many believed, it would be
wrong beca use it violated the individualistic creed
that peopl e should help themselves unless they were
physica lly unable to do so.
But fa ilure by the Roosevelt administration to produce a compreh ensive socia l sec urity program, his
supporters felt, might make the president vulnerable
in the 1936 election to the leaders of va rious radical
socia l movements. Huey Long of Louisia na was proposing a "Share Our Wealth " plan; Upton Sinclair
was running for governor of Ca lifornia on a platform
calling for programs to "End Poverty in California";
a nd Dr. Francis E. Townsend was leading an organization of hundreds of thousands of elderly people on
wbose beha lf be demanded government pensions of
$200 a month.
Tbe plan tbat emerged from the cabinet committee
was ca refully designed to meet popular demands within the framework of popular beliefs and constitutional

517

5 18

Chapter 19

Social We lfare

111 1934, Huey LOl1g, the popular governor of Louisial1a,
claimed that Roosevelt was not doing enougll to help the
COmmOl1l11al1. But bejore he could become a serious threat
to Roosevelt il1 the 1936 electiol1, he was assassil1ated
ill 1935.

understandings. It called for two kinds of programs:
(1) an insurance program for the unemployed and
elderly, to which workers would contribute and from
which they would benefit when they became unemployed or retired; and (2) an assistance program for
the blind, dependent children. and the aged. (Giving
assistance as well as providing "insurance" for the
aged was necessary because for the fLrst few years the

insurance program

A self-financing government program based on contributions that provide benefits to unemployed or retired persons.
assistance program A government program
financed by general income taxes that provides
benefits to poor citizens without requiring
contribution from them.
means test An income qualification program
that determines whether one is eligible for
benefits under government programs reserved
for lower-income groups.

insurance program would not payout any benefits.)
The federa l government would use its power to tax to
provide the funds , but all of the programs (except for
old-age insurance) would be administered by the
states. Everybody, rich or poor, would be eligible for the
insurance programs. Only the poor, as measured by a
means test (a measure to determine that incomes are
below a certain level), would be eligible for the assistance programs. Though bitterly opposed by some, the
resulting Social Security Act passed swiftly and virtually unchanged through Congress. It was introduced
in January 1935 and signed by President Roosevelt in
August of that year.
The idea of having the government pay the medical and hospital bills of the elderly and the poor had
been discussed in Washington since the drafting of
the Social Security Act. President Roosevelt and his
Committee on Economic Security sensed that medical care would be very controversial. and so health
programs were left out of the 1935 bill in order not
to jeopardize its chances of passage. lO
The proponents of the idea did not abandon it,
however. Working mostly within th e executive
branch, they continued to press, sometimes publicly,
sometimes behind the scenes, for a national health
care plan. Democratic presidents, includ ing Truman,
Kennedy, and Johnson, favored it; Re publican pres ident Eisenhower opposed it; Congress was deeply
divided on it. The American Med ical Association
attacked it as "socialized med icine. " For thirty years
key policy entrepreneurs. such as Wilbur Cohen,
worked to find a formula that would produce a congress ional majority.
The first and highest hurd le to overcome, however, was not Congress as a whole but the House Ways
and Means Committee, especia lly its powerful chairman fro m 1958 to 1975, Wilbur Mills of Arkansas.
A majority of the committee members opposed a
nationa l health care program. Some members
believed it wrong in principle; others feared that
adding a costly health component to the Social Security system would jeopardize the fi nancial solvency
and adm inistrative integrity of one of the most popular government programs. By the early 1960s a
majority of the House favored a health care plan, but
without the approval of Ways and Means it would
never reach the 1100r.
The 1964 elections changed all that. The Johnson
landslide produced such large Democratic majorities
in Congress that the composition of the committees
changed. In particular the membership of the Ways

Social Welfare in the United States

President Lyndon Johnson (lejt) signs the Medicare Act in 1965 in the company of Vice President Hubert Humphrey (standing) and former president Harry S Truman (right).

and Means Committee was altered. Whereas before it
had three Democrats for every two Republicans. after
11964 it had two Democrats for everyone Republican. The House leadership saw to it that the new
Democrats on the committee were strongly committed to a health care program. Suddenly the committee had a majority favorable to such a plan. and Mills.
realizing that a bill would pass and wanting to help
shape its form . changed his position and became a
supporter of what was to become Medicare.
The policy entrepreneurs in and out of the government who drafted the Medicare plan attempted to
anticipate the major objections to it. First. the bill
would apply only to the aged-those eligible for
Social Security retirement benefits. This wou ld reassure legislators worried about the cost of providing
tax-supported health care for everybody. Second. the
plan would cover only hospital expenses. not doctors'
bills. Since doctors were not to be paid by the government. they would not be regulated by it; thus. presumably. the opposition of the American Med ical
Association would be blunted.
Unexpected ly. however. the Ways and Means
Committee broadened the coverage of the plan

beyond what the administration had thought was
politically feasible. It added sections providing medical assistance. ca lled Medicaid . for the poor (defined
as those already getting public assistance payments)
and payment of doctors' bills for the aged (a new part
of Medicare) . The new. much-enlarged bill passed
both houses of Congress with ease. The key votes pitted a majority of the Democrats against a majority of
the Republicans.

Reforming Majoritarian Welfare
Programs
Both Social Security and Medicare are changing.
What a majority of the people want will soon cost
them more money than they can afford . But not
every citizen is prepared to do what is necessary to fix
this problem. and so the politicians are left in a bind :
they must "save" Social Security and Medicare without changing Social Security and Medicare. It will
not be easy.
The key problem for Social Security is that. as the
population ages. soon there will not be enough people paying Social Security taxes to provide benefits

519

520

Chapter 19

Social Welfare

Reforming Social Security
Percent Who Agree
Program Solvency'
Social Security can be counted on as a source of retirement income
18-34-year-olds
35-49
50-64
65 and over

6
10
35
59

Program Benefits'
28
10

Gradually raise the retirement age to 70
Reduce benefits
Individuallnvestment b
Let workers shift some Social Security ta x payments into personal retirement accounts
that they would invest on their own
Let workers decide how some of their own Social Security contributions are invested
Let workers have individual accounts and make their own investments with a portion of
their Social Security ta x payments
Let workers invest a portion of their Social Security taxes in investments like the stock
market, getting more money if investments do well, less if they do poorly
Let people invest some of their Social Security tax paym ents in stock market, with
benefits higher or lower than expected depending on stock market's performance
Government Investment

80
71
64
60
48

b

Invest some Social Security revenues in stock market inst ead of putting them all in
government bonds
Have government invest in private stock market a portion of Social Security reserve funds,
currently invested in governme nt bonds
Keep system intact, but government invests 40 percent of Social Security revenues in
stock market
Invest a portion of Social Security tax funds in stock ma rket
Let government invest part of money it holds in Social Security in stock market

50
38
37
36
29

Sources: (a) The American Enterprise (March/April 1999) 92-93, reporting data from two national surveys conducted in 1997; (b) Robert Blendon
et aI., "America in Denial," The Brookings Review (Summer 1998): 46, 48, reporting data from eight national surveys conducted in 1998.

for every retired perso n. By 2020 there will be fewer
than four workers for every retiree, and the payroll
taxes on these workers would have to double to pay
that retiree's bills.
There are three ways to so lve this problem. The
first involves three moves: raise the retirement age to
seventy, freeze the amount of retirement benefits.
and raise Social Security taxes. The public opposes all
of these strategies (see Table 19.1).
The second solution wou ld be to privatize Socia l
Security by requiring either ci tizens or some government agency to invest all or part of their Social Security taxes in the stock market. When peopl e retired,
they wou ld live on these stock market gains. In theory the stock market wo uld give people a greater
return on their money than has Socia l Security. But
there are risks to any investment, and this one may

not pan ou t. In ad dition the government would still
need money to pay the benefits of people alrea dy
retired or about to retire.
The third solution would be to use the first two
changes and in addition permit citizens to invest some
of their Socia l Security taxes in carefully chosen mutual funds. A national advisory commission proposed this
to President Clinton, but he did nothing. Another commission proposed three ways of doing this to President
George W. Bush, but he received the report just a few
months alter September 11, 2001. By that time the
government and the coun try were absorbed by the war
on terror, and so there was no political opportunity to
consider the plan. But Bush revived the plan in 2004
and the 109th Congress began to debate it in 2005.
The key problem with Medicare is that it not only
costs a huge a moun t of money, but it also is not a

Social Welfare il1 the Ul1 ited States

521

HOW THINGS WORK
Medicare
Medicare has two parts: Part A (hospital insurance)
and Part B (medica l insurance) . Everyone who is age
sixty-five or older is entitled to Part A; t o get Part B,
you must enroll in the program (almost everybody
age sixty-five or ol der does enroll) .
Part A pays fo r inpatient visits to hospitals, covering most (but not all) of the services you rece ive
there for up to ninety days during any benefit period. (A benefit period is a hospital stay that occurs at
least sixty days after the patient was last released
from a hospital.) When a patient uses Part A, he or

very efficient way of paying for hea lth care. When
Medicare was enacted in 1965, the government sa id
that by 1990 it would cost $12 bill ion a year. When
1990 rolled around, Medicare actua lly cost $110 bi llion. As the population gets older and new (a nd
expensive) li fe- prolonging technolog ies are developed, the cost of the program will rise even faster.
Without major changes, the program may run out of
money as early as 2008.
Med icare allows people to visit the doctor or go to
the hosp ital whenever they feel they need to (see the
box above) . The doctor or hospital is paid a fee for
each visit. This creates three problems: (1) a lot of
people use medical services when they don't really
need them; (2) some doctors and hospitals overcharge the government for their services; and (3)
doctors and hospita ls are pa id on the bas is of a
government-approved payment plan that can change
whenever the government wants to save money.
In 199 7 a bipartisan commission was formed to
solve the problem of Medicare. but President Clinton.
who had helped create it. repud iated its report. Few
politicians are willing to propose cost-cutting measures for fear of being burned at the voting booth.
One possible cure is to get rid of Medicare and
instead have doctors and hospitals work for the
government. That is done in several countries. and
as a resu lt the citizens of these countries pay less for
health care than do u.s. citizens (see Table 19.2). But
(

.I

•

she must pay the first $696 in hospital costs. Part A is
financed by Medicare payroll taxes.
Part B pays for doctors' services and outpatient
hospital care. There are no limits on the number of
visits to the doctor, but the patient must pay an
annual $100 deductible and 20 percent of the cost of
each visit. The recipient pays a monthly premium (in
mid-2000, about $45), which covers only a small part
of the total cost of care; the rest of the money comes
from the government's general revenues.

many critics claim that government-run hea lth care
provides fewer benefits and slower care and discourages aggressive new hea lth care innovations.
A second solution to the problem is to let the elderly take their Medicare money and buy health
insurance from private suppliers, including hea lth
ma intenance organizations (HMOs). This mayor
may not be an affordable alternative for ind ivid uals.
Instead of either solution. a federal government
budget surplus in 1999 led President Clinton to propose

Table 19.2

Country
United States
Germany
Fra nce
Portugal
Au st rali a
Unit ed Kingdom
Czech Republi c
Mexico
Tu rkey

-•

Share of Gross Domestic Product (%)
13.9
10.7
9 .5
9. 2
9. 2

7.6
7.3
6.0
4.8

Source: Uwe Reinhardt et aI. , "U.S. Hea lth Care Spending in an
International Context." Health Affairs, Vol. 23, Issue 3, 2004,
Exhibit 1.

522

C/'/(/pter J9

Social Welfare

country's number o ne problem in September
1993. ' 2 But the aging of the baby boom population,
the continu ed growth in total government expenditures on hea lth care, and political pressures exerted
by powerful interest groups like the AARP (see Chapter 11), among other factors, keep health care iss ues
high on the federal socia l welfare policy agenda.
Thus in 2003, Bush signed the Med icare Modernization Act. affording prescription drug coverage to
qualifi ed senior citizens beginning in 2006.

Client Welfare Programs: Aid to
Families with Dependent Children
Aid to Fn1l1ilies witl! Dependent Childrell (AFDC) becnme
col1trollersini ns AlIlericnns beynl1 to see it ns n program
tlwt chiej1y nidal wlIllnrried blnck lI1others.

spend ing $ 794 billion on prolonging Medica re's lire
while adding many new benefits. such as payment for
some prescription drugs. Few politicians wanted to
criticize this politically popular idea. even though
many of them knew that spending more money on a
broken system wou ld only postpone the inevitable.
One day it will become clear that "the inevitabilities of disease and aging" cannot be avoided simply
by spend in g more money or emp loying the latest
technology.ll For the foreseeable future, however,
politicians will continu e to propose a ll kinds of
health care legis lation. In late 2001. President
George W. Bush and key members of Congress
seemed to be approaching agreement on a patients'
bill of rights, prescription drug benefits for the elderly, and a h a lf-d ozen other new health care measures.
By June 2002, however, no new health care measures had passed. and only 5 percent of the public
ranked "poor hosp ital care/ high cost of healthcare"
as "the most important problem facing this country
today." way behind "terrorism" at 33 percent a nd
"economy in genera l" at 14 percent, and a far cry
from the 28 percent who had ranked health as the
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) A provision
of a 1975 law that entitles working families
with children to receive money from the government if their total income is below a certain level. The program was expanded in the
early 1990s.

One part of the Socia l Security Act of 1935 created
what came to be ca ll ed Aid to Fam ili es with Dependent Children (AFDC). It was scarcely noticed at the
time. The federal government. in response to the
depress ion, promised to provide aid to states that
were, in many cases. a lready running progra ms to
help poor ch ildren who lacked a father.
Beca use AFDC involved giving federal aid to existing state programs. it allowed the states to define
what constituted "need. " to set benefit levels, and to
ad minister the program. Washington did set (a nd ,
over the yea rs, continued to increase) a number of
rules governing how the program would work, however. Washington told the states how to ca lcu late
applica nts' incomes and required the states to give
Medicaid to AFDC recipients. The states had to establish mandatory job-tra ining programs for many
AFDC recipients and to provide child-care programs
for working AFDC parents. Was hington also required
that women on AFDC identify their children's fathers.
In ad dition to the grow ing list of requirements,
Washin gton created new programs for which AFDC
recipients were eli gibl e, such as Food Stamps, the
Earned Income Tax Credit (a cash grant to poor
parents who were working), free school meals, various forms of housin g assistance. and certain other
benefits. But whil e all this was h appening, public
op inion moved aga inst the AFDC program.
The combination of souring public opinion, increasing federa l regulations. and a grOwing roster of benefits
produced a program that irritated almost everyone.
The states disliked having to conform to a growing list
of federal regulations. The public dislU<ed the program
because they thought it was weakening the family by
encouraging out-of-wedlock births (since AFDC recipients received additional benefi ts for each new child).

Two Kinds of Welfare Politics
The public worried that AFDC recipients were working covertly on the side; the data proved that this
was true of at least half of them in several large cities.
AFDC recipients saw that the actual (that is. inflationadjusted) value of their AFDC checks was goin g down.
Critics countered that if you added together all the beneflts they were receiving (food stamps, Medicaid, housing assistance, and so on), beneflt levels were actually
going up. Politicians complained that healthy parents
were living off AFDC instead 0(' working. The AFDC law
was revised many times, but never in a way that satisfled ali, or even most. 0(' its critics. Though AFDC recipients were only a small fra ction of a UAmericans, they
had become a large political problem.
What mad e matters worse was that the composition of the people in the program had changed. In
1970 about half of the mothers on AFDC were there
because their husbands had died or divorced them;
on ly a quarter had never been married.1 3 By 1994
the situation had ch anged dramatically: only about a
quarter of AFDC mothers were widowed or divorced,
and over half had never been married at a ll. And
though most women on AFDC for the first time got
of!' it after just a few years , almost two-thirds of the
women on AFDC at any given moment had been on
it for eight years or more.
These facts, combined with the increased proportion of out-of-wedlock births in the country as a
whole, made it virtually impossible to sustain poli tical support for what had begun as a noncontroversial client program. In 1996 the program was
abolished. It was replaced by a block grant program,
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF),
that set strict fed eral requirements about work and
limi ted how long famili es can receive federally funded benefits. Under TA F. by 2003, welfare caseloads
nationally had declined by nearly 60 percent.

Two Kinds of Welfare Politics
The programs just described illustrate two patterns of
po li cy-making. The old-age pensions created by the
Socia l Security Act of 1935 and the health care
benel'its created by the Medicare Act of 196 5 are
exa mples of majoritarian politi cs: almost everybody
benefits, and almost everybody pays. The TANF program is an exa mple of client po li tics: a relatively few
people benefit, but everybody pays.

Majoritarian Politics
When both the benefits and th e costs of a proposed
program are widely distributed, the proposa l wi ll be
adopted if the beneficiaries believe that their benefits
will exceed their costs and if political elites believe
that it is legitimate for the federal government to
adopt the program.
Initially the benefits people received from the
retirement program greatly exceeded its costs to
them. Older people were ab le to get an old-age pension or health care even though they had paid in
taxes only a small fraction of what these benefits
cost. Social Security and Medicare seemed initially
like the nearest thing to a free lunch.
The big debate in 1935 a nd 1965 was not over
whether the people wanted these programs-the polls
showed that they did-but over whether it was legitimate ('or the federal government to provide them.] 4 In
1935 conservatives argued that as desirable as Social
Security might be. nothing in the Constitution authorized the federal government to spend money for this
purpose; welfare, they said, was a policy area reserved
to the states. Libera ls rejoined that the federal government had an obligation to help people avoid poverty in
their old age. Besides, they said, as an "insurance" program, retirement beneflts were not really a federal
expenditure at all: Washington was merely collecting
payments and holding them in a trust fund until the
people who paid them were ready to retire. In the
midst of the Great Depress ion and at a time when liberals had large majorities in Congress, it was an easy
argument to make, and so the Social Security bill readily crossed over the legitimacy barrier.
In 1965 the same issues were raised. Conservatives argued that med ica l ca re was a private, not a
governmental. matter and that any federal involvement would subj ect doctors and hospitals to endless
red tape and harm the qua li ty of the doctor-patient
re lationship. Liberals rejoined that the elderly had
hea lth needs that they co uld not meet without help
and that on ly the federa l gover nment had the
resources to provide that assistance. Beca use the
1964 elections, when Lyndon Johnson defeated
Barry Goldwater, had swept into the House and Senate large majorities of liberal Democrats, there was
no chance that a conservative coa li tion of Repub licans and southern Democrats could defeat Medicare.
and so it passed.

523

Chapter 19

524

Social We lfare

WHO GOVERNS? TO WHAT ENDS?
Reforming Majoritarian Education Programs

merica is home to about 50 million public
school children . Most citizens, even the elderly and young adults with no children in
public schools, tend to think of public education in
majoritarian terms : everyone benefits, everyone
pays.
Until recently, Democrats pretty much owned this
majoritarian issue. With the exception of some
Democratic mayors, most Democratic leaders have
opposed plans to give parents school vouchers (public monies that can be used to pay for private or religious school tuitions). Meanwhile, most Republican
leaders have favored vouchers. In 2000, voucher referenda were defeated soundly in California and
Michigan.
Three days after taking office in January 2001,
Republican president George W. Bush proposed an
education reform plan that he then described as "the
cornerstone of my administration." It contained
voucher language and related provisions that would
have effected sweeping changes in the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act (ESEA). But just a few
months into negotiations on the bill with Senate
Democrats, virtually every aspect of the original Bush
plan that could not be credibly couched in majoritarian terms, reconciled with existing ESEA programs, or
otherwise justified as "recruiting high-quality teachers," "promoting informed parental choice," or

A

"improving the academic achievement of the disadvantaged" was abandoned.
On January 8, 2002, Congress easily passed the No
Child Left Behind Act of 2001. The president's major
ally in getting the 670-page education reform plan
into law was Democratic senator Ted Kennedy of
Massachusetts. Democrats applauded the act mainly
for increasing federal education funding under the
ESEA by 49 percent over 2000 levels, to over $22 billion a year. Republicans, led by House conservatives,
complained about the increased ESEA spending and
lamented that the new law did nothing to advance
the cause of school vouchers. The public, however,
gave the Bush administration high marks. Shortly
after the president signed the bill into law, polls
showed that, for the first time in many years, most
citizens rated Republicans on a par with Democrats in
dealing with education issues.
On June 27, 2002, the U.S. Supreme Court declared
in the case of Zelman v. Simmons-Harris that school
voucher programs that provide " true private choice"
are constitutional. President Bush issued a public
statement strongly supporting the Court's decision. It
remains to be seen, however, whether either the
Bush administration or other Republican leaders will
identify themselves in the future with school reform
proposals that are not obviously or strictly in accord
with majoritarian sentiments on education policy.

The votes in Congress on Social Security and
Medicare followed party lines. Since the Democratic
opponents of these bills were typica lly conservative
southerners, the vote followed ideological lines even
more closely.

Client Politics
When the benefits of a proposal are to go to a relatively small group but the public at large pays, we
have cl ient politics. Proposals to benefit cl ients wi ll

pass if the cost to the public at large is not perceived
to be great and if the client receiving the benefit is
th ought to be "deserv ing."
As noted previously, when AFDC was first enacted, it was relatively noncontroversial. Origina lly it
seemed intended to help deserving people. In 1935
the typi ca l welfare mother was perceived to be a
woman living in a small town, whose hu sband had
been killed in a mining accident. Who could object to
giving some mod est help to a person who was the
victim of circumstances?

Presidential Candidate
Says Feds Should
Pay Tab for Elderly's
Prescription Drugs
Rx for BUdget Bustin

Ju ly 9

.
g, Rivals Respond

WILMfNGTON, DE

MEMORANDUM
To: Governor John Pergolini
From: Richard A. Smith, presidential
campaign manager
Subject: New federal health care
program: Medipharmacy

Speaking yesterday b tI
natIon's largest as . e are representa tives of th
sOClatlOn f i e
persons, Delaware govern a e derly and retired
ful John Pergolini drew thor and preSIdential hopehe pledged to expand tI d underous applause when
caver prescription drug e eral hea lth care plans to
age sixty-five or old payments for needy persons
er ...

According to the latest polls, your
proposal that Washington pay more for
prescription drugs for needy elderly persons is quite popular. The staff
recommends that you next call for a new federal health care program, Medipharmacy,
which would provide drug coverage through the Medicaid program to Medicare
beneficiaries age seventy or older who make up to $15,000 a year and would expand
drug coverage for all children on Medicaid.
Arguments for:
1. Medicare does not cover prescription drugs. Med icaid, with more than four million
recipients age sixty-five or older and nearly twenty million child beneficiaries, varies
from state to state and covers prescription drugs for some but not all beneficiaries.
2. Beginning in 2002 Medicaid will cove r all children under the age of nineteen, but it
will not cover all children age six or older who live in families that make even a
penny a year above the official federal poverty line ($16,530 a year for a fami ly of
four in 1998).
3. Price-gouging drug companies could be blamed for spiraling costs and required to
sell to Medipharmacy beneficiaries at deep discounts.
Arguments against:
1. In 2010 Americans age sixty-five or older will have an average life expectancy of 18.5
additional years . Starting coverage for the elderly at sixty-five would be prohibitively
expensive . Starting it at age seventy would conta in but not control costs.
2. Medipharmacy could crowd out already meager per capita federal health care
spending on poor chi ldren, as some would say has already happened with Medicaid .
3. By increasing the demand for prescr ipt ion drugs paid for by the government,
Medipharmacy could further distort the market in ways that make medicine more
expensive for everyone .
Your decision:
Propose Medipharmacy _ __
Reject Medipharmacy _ __

Chapter 19

526

Social Welfare

Right or wrong, American values on this subject
changed. Today most Americans believe that ablebodied people on welfare should be made to work for
their benefits, period. The work-based welfare provisions of TA F plainly reflect this belief. In 2002, during the largely consensual congressional debate over
reauthorizing TANF, even many who had opposed
these strategies in 1996 (when TANF replaced
AFDC) now supported them. There remains, however, some popular sentiment for giving welfare recipients job training or even creating government jobs
for them. This service strategy (providing tra ining
and education) is strongly preferred to an income
strategy (giving people money)-unless. of course.
the income can be called "insurance. "l )
Indeed, some critics of welfare, such as Charles
Murray, have argued that AFDC actua lly increased
the number of people living in poverty. Murray
claimed that high welfare benefits made it more
attractive for some people to go on welfare than to
look for a job and more attractive for some women to
have babies than to get married. This kept them poor.
Other scholars have criticized Murray's thesis. They
have argued that there is no direct evidence that welfare encourages family breakup and have suggested
that the rise in the number of illegitimate children
occurred during a period (the 1970s) when welfare
benefits, in real (that is, inflation-adjusted) dollars,
were going down.16
In short the clients of these programs never
acquired in the public's mind the legitimacy necessary for their programs to prosper. As a result, whereas for forty years it was thought to be good politics to

*

increase old-age benellts, it increasingly became considered bad politics to do anything but attack, investigate, and curtail "welfare" programs.
Still, as we stressed in Chapter 17, the politics
of policy issues can be affected by changes in people's perceptions concerning who bears the burdens
and who receives the benefits. Thus, under TANF,
between 1996 and 2003 , able-bodied adults had
a harder time getting welfare benefits, but welfarerelated child-care spending in most states rose by 50
percent or more. I7 In 2005 President Bush , with
bipartisan backing in Congress, pledged to continue
fund ing federal support for childcare at record levels
(approaching $5 bi llion a year), and to protect funding for new programs to help the low-income children of prisoners.
Likew ise, the politics of prescription-drug benefits
for senior citizens soured somewhat in 2004 when
various expert bodies calculated that the latest federal initiative might cost about $ 5 50 billion over the
next decade (roughly 35 percent more than had
previously been estimated), and a total of $2 .5 trillion over the program's first two decades as baby
boomers, a popu lation that neither suffered through
the Great Depression of the 1930s nor lived through
World War II. reach retirement age and milk their
Medicare benefits. IS
The politiCS of the policy process is always hard to
predict, but in the years just ahead, needy children and
other at-risk youth might well prove more politically
popular, and be more widely perceived as "deserving"
government aid, than baby-boomer retirees.

SUMMARY

1 A Iecan explain the politiCS of social welfare pol-

V" icy in America principally in terms of two fac-

tors: who benefits and who pays, and the beliefs
citizens have about social justice. Neither factor is

ser vice strategy

A policy provid ing poor people w ith education and job training to help lift
them out of poverty.
income strategy A po licy giving poor people
mon ey t o help lift th em out of poverty.

static: ga iners and losers vary as the composition of
society and the workings of the economy change,
and beliefs about who deserves what are mod ified as
attitudes toward work, the family, and the ob ligations
of government change.
The congressional (as opposed to the parliamentary) system of government means that greater political effort and more time are required for the
adoption of a new welfare policy. Federalism means
that the states will playa large role in determining
how any welfare program is administered and at
what level benefits are set.

Summary
RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?
1. How, if at all, have Americans' views of govern-

2. Why are some govemmel1t social welfare pro-

ment's responsibility to help the "deserving
poor" changed over time?
Americans once insisted that public a id be given only
to people who cannot help themselves. American
welfare policy since the 19 30s has undergone a slow
but steady change in how it has separated the
"deserving " from the "undeserving" poor. In essence,
today we separate them less and are more willing to
have people rely solely on the government for help.
For example, even before the ew Deal, most Americans would surely have counted a poor, disabled,
blind, eld erly woman deserted by her fam ily as
deserving of public aid. Today, however, many citizens would also favor giving her aid even if she were
only disabled, without regard to her income or family situation. Likewise, whereas once most Americans
were inclined to provide public aid on ly if the beneficiary's fami ly helped too, today most citizens do oot
believe in strictly conditioning public aid 00 family
support. Thus in 2002, Washington policymakers
were debating whether to provide prescription drug
benefits to the elderly. They ca ll ed for providing such
benefits even to middle-income elderly citizens, without regard for whether grown chi ldren might a lso be
ab le to help pay for their parents' medications.

grams politically protected while others are
politically imperiled?
Majoritar ian programs (nea rly everyone benefits,
nearly everyone pays) like Social Security and
Med icare are politically sacrosanct. Client-based programs (a relatively few number of people benefit, but
a lmost everyone pays) like the now-defunct Aid to
Families with Dependent Child ren (AFDC) are politically shaky. Debates about the former normally concern only how to keep the benefits flowing; debates
about the latter often concern whether to keep the
program ongoing. But certain client-based programs
are less politically vulnerable than others- it all
depends on who the clients are, or are widely perceived to be. For example, in the mid-1990s, Republican leaders in Congress declared that they wanted
to slow the growth of Medicaid and abolish AFDC. In
the end, Medicaid grew faster aod AFDC was abolished. Med icaid was protected largely because its
clients included middle-class retirees who received
nursing home benefits and medically needy lowincome children. AFDC was targeted because its
cli ents were perceived by many to include ablebodied adu lts who chose to receive public a id rather
than go to work.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. What does the Constitution mean by "pro mote
the general Welfare"?
The Framers of the Constitution did not mean by this
phrase that government has a duty to provide cash
assistance or other benefits to citizens in economic
need, or that the president or Congress has to manage the economy. Rather, they undoubtedly meant
something closer to "protect private property and
promote public safety and morals. " It is difficult,
however. to be sure about what they meant by those
words. Without relying on any particular interpretation of that phrase from the Constitution's preamble,
some present-day advocates for the poor have suggested that the federal government, by enacting laws
intended to lift low-income citizens out of poverty, to
provide health care at public expense. and to guarantee access to affordab le housing, has thereby

estab lished a constitutional right to such social welfare programs, services, or supports. There is little
constitutional case law to support that view, but the
idea may be catching on.
2. Should religious groups be eligible to administer
some federal welfare programs?
For decades now, large national religious charities
have received government grants and contracts to
administer various federal social service delivery programs. Under four Charitable Choice laws passed with
bipartisan support and Signed by President Clinton,
the federal government may not discriminate against
community-serving faith-based organizations in the
grant-making process, but these organizations are
strictly prohibited from using any public funds to
proselytize, provide religious instruction, or perform

527

528

Chapter 19

Social Welfare

worship services; may not hire on ly coreli gionists;
and must serve all eligible persons without regard to
religion. Public opinion surveys show that by three to
one majorities people support this approach to publicpri vate partnerships involving reli gious organizations,

and the courts have consistently upheld its lega lity and
co nstitutiona li ty. But some reli gious conservatives
argue that this approach does not go far enough, while
some civil li bertarians worry that it goes too far.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

Social welfare programs
Medicare: www.meclicare.gov
Socia l Security: www.ssa.gov
TANF: www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/ofa/

Views on Socia l Security reform
www.socialsecurityreform.org
www.socialsecurity.org
www.socsec.org

SUGGESTED READINGS
Derthick. Martha. PoliCiJllIllkillg f or Socill/ Sec lIri t!l. Washington.
D.C.: Brookings Institution. 19 79 . A deta il ed a na lysis of how
th e Socia l Securi ty program grew.
Hecla. Hugh . M odel'll SOcill/ Politics ill Britaill Illld Swedell. ew
Ha ven. Co nn .: Ya le n iversity Press. 1974. Co mpa rati ve
ana lys is of how socia l welfa re prog ra ms came to Britain and
Sweden.
Mo nsma. Stephe n V. Plittillg Failh ill Partll ers/lip s: WelJilre-to- Work
ill FOllr Cities. Ann Arbor: Th e University o f Mi chi gan Press.
2 004. Ca reful study of th e six d ifferent types of organ ization s
that adm ini ster welfa re-to-wo rk program s in bi g citi es today.

Moyn ih a n. Danie l Patrick. FllIlli/!lllIld N atioll . New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. J 9 8 6. Argum ent l'or th e importa nce of federal po li cy to aid famili es. Disputes the Murray thesis.
Murray. Cha rl es. Losillg Gro llll(/: A II/ crimll Socia/ Po/ic!l. 19501980. ew York: Basic Books. 19 84 . An argum ent that federal
spendin g on th e poor actually increased poverty during the
19 6 0 s a nd 1970 s.
Wilso n. Willi am J. rhe Trll/I} Dislldvllll taged. Chi ca go: University of
Chicago Press. 19 87. Disputes Murray 's explan a tion. a rg uin g
in slead that ghetto pove rty is th e result of th e movement of
jobs o ut of citi es.

CHAPTER

20

Foreign and Military Policy

Kinds of Foreign Policy

The Use of Military Force

The Constitutional and Legal Context

The Defense Budget

Presidential Box Score • Evaluating the
Power of the President • Checks on
Presidential Power

The Machinery of Foreign Policy
Foreign Policy and Public Opinion
Backing the President •
Elite Opinion

Mass Versus

Cleavages Among Foreign Policy Elites
Howa Worldview Shapes Foreign Policy

Total Spending • What Do We Get
with Our Money?

The Structure of Defense
Decision-Making
Joint Chiefs of Staff • The Services •
The Chain of Command

The New Problem of Terrorism

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

2.

Is American foreign policy set by
public wishes or elite views?
If only Congress can declare war,
why has the president become so
powerful in military affairs?

2.

Why do we go to war against some
dictatorships and not others?
Should our foreign policy be based
on American interests or some conception of human rights?

1 A ~en you heard about the attacks by hijacked a ircraft against the

VV

~orld Trade Center and the Pentagon on September 11, 2001
(now a lways known as "9/11 " ), you were witnessing the most lethal
destruction of American lives and property since the Japanese bombed
Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941. But 9/ 11 was different from Pearl Harbor: the attack on Pearl Harbor had. so to speak, a return address: we knew
who did it and where they lived. But 9111 had no return address: it was a
terrorist attack waged by small groups that could be located anywhere.
The public response was impressive, as was evident in an outb urst of
patriotism and a heightened sense of confidence in the national government. Valuable as these reactions were, they left unanswered some fundamental questions:
• How can America wage war in remote nations that harbor terrorists?
• If terrorists are sheltered or supported by nations that are otherwise
friendly to the United States, what do we do about these countr ies?
• Should the United States allow other nations (for example, Israel) to
wage war against terrorists (for example. those in neighboring Palestine), or should we try to be mediators ?
• How can the military, designee! to fight big, conventional land wars in
Europe, be redesigned to make it effective in small, long-lasting struggles
against terrorists ?
And terrorism is not our only foreign or military problem. It is a new and
very important one added to a long list of other issues. Among them are two

questions:
• Do we support any nation that goes a long with us, or on ly those that are
reasonably free and democratic?
• Are we the world 's policeman? We did not intervene to prevent China
frolll occupying Tibet, to end the massacre of thousands of Tutsis in
Rwanda, or to help Bosnia when it was being attacked by Serbs. But we
did intervene to try to end a dictatorship in Haiti. to help starv in g people
in Somalia, to turn back an Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, and to punish Serbs
who were attacking Kosovo.
These choices must be made in a democracy, and some observers think
that democratic politics makes managing foreign and military policy harder. Tocqueville said that the conduct of foreign affairs requires precisely
those qualities most lacking in a democratic nation: ''A democracy can on ly

530

Kinds of Foreign Policy
with great difficulty regulate the deta ils of an importa nt und ertaking, persevere in a fixed design . a nd
work out its execution in spite of serious obstacl es. It
ca nn ot combine its measures with secrecy or awa it
their consequences with patience. " 1 In plain la nguage a democracy is forced to play foreign po licy
poker with its cards turned up. As a resu lt agg ressors, fro m Hitler to Sadd am Hussein . ca n bluff or
misjudge us.
Bu t other writers disag ree. To them. the strength of
democracy is that, though it rarely if ever wages an
unjustified war on another country, its people, when
mobilized by the president. will support our overseas
en gagements even when many deaths occur.2
Others find fa ul t not with the system but with
what they view as the reckless policies of American
presid ents . If Congress had been more involved, they
say, we would not have gotten bogged down in Vietna m. tried to trade arms for hostages in Iran. or supported the rebels in icaragua.
Ha ppily. most foreign policy issues a re not m atters
of war or peace. But the sa me issu es ca n be found in
them a ll: How great are the powers of the president?
What role should Congress play? How impor tan t is
public opinion? When do interest groups make a differen ce? To an swer those questions we mu st fir st di stinguish a mong foreign poli cy iss ues that invo lve
maj oritarian , interest gro up, a nd cli ent po litics.

*

Kinds of Foreign Policy

The m ajor itarian compo nent of fo re ign policy
includes those decisions (a nd nondecisions) th at are
perceived to confer widely di stributed benefits and
impose widely distributed costs. The decision to go to
war is a n obvious exa mpl e of thi s. So, too, are the
establishment of military a lliances with Western
Europe, the negotiation of a nuclear test ban treaty
or a strategic arms limitation agreement, the response to the crisis posed by the Soviet blockade of
West Berlin or the placement of Soviet offen sive missil es in Cuba, the decision to aid the contras in
Nicaragua. a nd th e opening up of dipl omatic relati ons with the People's Republic of Chin a. These may
be good or bad policies, but such benefits a nd such
costs as they have accrue to the nation genera lly.
Some argue that the costs of ma ny of these poli cies
are in fact highly concentrated- for exa mple, sol-

di ers bea r the burden of a military operation- bu t
th at turns out. on closer inspection . not to shape the
pOSitions that people take on issues of war a nd peace.
Though so ldi ers and their immediate fa milies may
feel the costs of a war to an especially hi gh degree,
public opinion surveys taken during the Vietnam
War showed that having a family member in the
a rmed forces did not significantly affect how people
eva luated the war.3 There is a sense that, during
wartime, we are all in this together.
Foreign policy decisions may a lso refl ect interest
group politics. Tariff decisions confer benefits on certain business firms and labor unions a nd impose
costs on other flrms a nd unions. If the price of Japanese steel imported into this co untry is increased by
ta riffs, qu otas, or other devices, this helps the American steel industry a nd the Uni ted Steel Workers of
America. On the other hand , it hurts those firms
(a nd associated unions) that had been purchasing
the once-cheap Japanese steel.
Examples of client poli tics also occur in foreign
a ffairs. Was hington often provides aid to American
corporations doing business abroad because the aid
helps those fLrms directly without imposing a ny apparent costs on a n equally distinct group in society. Our
policy toward Israel has in part reflected the fact that
Jews in this co untry feel strongly about the need to
suppor t a Jewish state abroad and are well orga nized
to make those concerns felt. (Other factors also help
explain our suppor t of Israel; it is by no means a pure
case of client politics.) Arab Americans have begun to
organize and to press on the government concerns
very different fro m the pro-Israel arguments. We may
in fact be witnessing a change of our policy toward
Israel from one chiefly influenced by client polities to
one more subject to interest group politics.
Who has power in foreign policy depends very
mu ch on what kind of foreign policy we h ave in
mind. Where it is of a majoritaria n n ature, the president is cl ea rly the dominant fi gure, and much. if n ot
everything, depends on his beliefs and skills and on
those of his chi ef advisers. Public opini on will ordinarily support this presidential leadership, but it will
not guide it. As we sh all see, public opinion on
majoritarian fo reign policy issues usually reflects a
disposition to trust the president. Bu t woe to the president who by his actions forfeits that trust.
When interest group or client politics is involved.
Congress plays a much larger role. Although Congress

531

532

Chapter 20

Foreign and Military Policy

The Constitutional and
Legal Context

The embargo with Culm rellwins a divisive foreign policy
issue. Fo rmer President Jimmy Carter paid a visit there in
2002 and was the Jirst u.s. president to do so since Fidel
Castro rose to power allllostfiJty years ago.

has a subsidiary role in the condu ct of foreign diplomacy, the decision to send troops overseas, or the
direction of intelligence operations, it has a large one
in decisions involving foreign economic aid. the structure of the tariff system, the shipment of weapons to
foreign allies, the creation of new weapons systems,
and the support of Israel.
And Congress is the central political arena on those
occasions when entrepreneurial politics shapes foreign policy. If a multinational corporation is caught in
a sca ndal, congressional investigations shake the
usual indifference of politicians to the foreign conduct
of such corporations. If presidential policies abroad
lead to reversals. as when in 1986 presidential aides
sought to trade arms for u.s. hostages in Iran and then
use some profits from the arms sa les to support the
anti-Marxist contras fi ghting in Nicaragua, Congress
becomes the forum for investigations and criticism. At
such moments Congress often seeks to expand its
power over foreign affairs.
In this chapter we will be chiefly co ncerned with
foreign policy insofar as it displays the characteristics
of majoritarian politiCS. Limiting the discussion in
this way permits us to focus on the grand issues of
foreign affairs-war, peace, and global diplomacy. It
all ows us to see how choices a re made in a situati on
in which public majorities support but do not direct
policy. in which opinion tends to react to events, and
in which interest groups are relatively unimportant.

The Constitution defines the authority of the pres ident and of Congress in foreign affairs in a way that.
as Edward Corwin put it, is an "invitation to struggle."4 The president is commander in chief of the
armed forces, but Congress must auth ori ze and
appropriate money for those forces. The president
appoints ambassadors. but they must be confirmed by
the Senate. The president may negotiate treaties, but
the Senate must ratify these by a two-thirds vote. Only
Co ngress may regulate commerce with other nations
and "declare" war. (In an early draft of the Constitution the Fra mers gave Congress the power to "make"
war but changed this to "declare" so that the president. acting without Congress. could take military
measures to repel a sudden attack.) Because power
over foreign affairs is shared by the president and
Congress, conl1ict between them is to be expected.
Yet almost every America n thinks instinctively
that the president is in charge of foreign affairs. a nd
what popular opinion supposes. the histor ica l record
confirms. Presidents have asserted the right to send
troops abroad on their own authority in more than
125 instances. Only six of the thirteen major wars
that this country has fought have followed a formal
declaration of war by Congress. 5 The State Department. the Ce ntral Intelligence Agency. a nd the
Nationa l Securi ty Agency are almost entirely "pres idential" agencies. with only modest congressiona l
co ntrol. The Defense Department. though keenly
sensitive to congressional views on weapons procurement and the location of military bases, is very
much under the control of the president on matters
of militar y strategy. Wh il e the Senate has since 1789
ratified well over a thousand treaties signed by the
president. the president durin g this period has also
signed around seven thousand executive agreements
with other countries that did not require Senate ratification and yet have the force of law.n

Presidential Box Score
When the president seeks congressional approva l for
foreign policy matters. he tend s to win more often
than when he asks for support on domestic matters.
One student of the presidency. Aaron Wild avsky,
co ncl uded that the American political system ha s
"two presidencies"- one in domestic affairs that is

The Constitutional and Legal Context

Shifting Patterns of Leadership in Foreign Policy
Depending on the personalities, skills, and interests of those involved , leadership in making American roreign policy may be found centered in the
White House (the president and his national security adViser) or in the State Department (the secretary of state).
Periods of White House Dominance
President
Secretary of State

Franklin D. Roosevelt
John F. Kennedy (and
National Security
Adviser McGeorge
Bundy)
Richard M. ixon (and
National Security
Adviser Henry A.
Kissinger)

Cordell Hull
(1933-1944)
Dean Rusk
(1961-1969)

William P. Rogers
(1969-1973)

Periods of Leadership by the Secretary
of State
Secretary of State
President

George C. Marshall
(1947-1949) and
Dean Acheson
(1949- 1953)
John Foster Dulles
(1953- 1959)
Henry A. Kissinger
(1973-1977)
Warren Christopher
(1993-1996)

• 1801: Thomas Jefferson sent the navy to deal
with the Barbary pirates.
• 1845: James K. Polk sent troops into Mexico to
derend newly acquired Texas.
• 1861: Abraham Linco ln blockaded southern
ports and declared martial law.
• 1940: Franklin D. Roosevelt sent fifty destroyers to
England to be used against Germany, with which
we were then technically at peace.
• 1950: Harry Truman sent American troops into
South Korea to help repulse a North Korean
attack on that country.

Dwight D. Eisenhower
Gerald R. Ford
Bill Clinton

Periods of Tension Between the White
House and Secretary of State

President
Jimmy Carter
Ronald Reagan

relatively weak and closely checked. and another in
roreign afrairs that is quite powerful ? As we sha ll see.
this view conSiderably overstates presidential power
in certain areas.
When it comes to internationa l diplomacy and
the use or American troops, the president is indeed
strong, much stronger than the Framers may have
intended and certainly stronger than many members
of Congress would prefer. Examples abound :

Harry S Truman

Secretary of State
Cyrus Vance
(1977- 1980)
George Shultz
(1982-1989)

• 19 60s: John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson sent
American forces into South Vietnam without a
declaration of war.
• 1983: Ronald Reagan sent troops to overthrow a
pro-Castro regime in Grenada.
• 1987: Reagan sent the navy to protect oil tankers
in the Persian Gulf.
• 1989: George H. W. Bush ordered the U.S. invasion
of Panama to depose dictator Manuel Noriega.
• 1990: Bush ordered troops to Saudi Arabia in
response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
• 1999: Bill Clinton ordered the military to attack,
with bombs and cruise missiles, Serbian forces
that were trying to control Kosovo.
• 2001: George W. Bush sent U.S. troops to liberate
Afghanistan from the Taliban, a regime supportive of Osama bin Laden, the architect or the
September 11 terrorist attacks.
• 2003: Bush. with some allies, invaded Iraq.
However, by the standards of other nations, even
other democratic ones, the ability or an American

533

534

Chapter 20

Foreign and Military Policy

president to act decisively often appears rather
modest. England was dismayed at the inability of
Woodrow Wilson in 1914- 1915 and Franklin Roosevelt in 19 39- 1940 to enter into an alliance when
England was engaged in a major war with Germany.
Wilson was unable to bring this country into the
League of ations. Gera ld Ford could not intervene
covertly in Angola in support of an anti-Marxist faction. Ronald Reagan was heavily criticized in Congress for sending fifty-five military advisers to El
Salvador and a few hundred Marines to Lebanon.
After George H.W. Bush sent U.S. troops to the Persian Gulf in 1990. he began a long debate with
Congress over whether he would need a formal declaration of war before the troops were sent into combat. George W. Bush's decision to invade Iraq in 2003
became bitterly controversial in the 2004 election.
Furthermore, a treaty signed by the president is
little more than his promise to try to get the Senate to
go along. He can sign executive agreements without
Senate consent, but most of these are authorized in
advance by Congress. s
By contrast, the leaders of other democratic
nations (to say nothing of totalitarian ones) are often
able to act with much greater freedom. While Reagan was arguing with Congress over whether we
shou ld assign any military advisers to El Salvador.
the president of France. Fran<;:ois Mitterrand, ordered
twenty-five hundred combat troops to Chad with

scarcely a ripple of opposition. A predecessor of Mitterrand. Charles de Gaulle, brought France into the
European Common Market over the explicit opposition of the French Assembly and granted independence to Algeria, then a French co lony, without
seriously consu lting the Assemb ly. 9 The British
prime minister brought his country into the Common Market despite popular opposition and can
declare war without the consent of Pariiament. IO

Evaluating the Power of the President
Whether one thinks the president is too strong or too
weak in foreign affairs depends not only on whether
one holds a domestic or international point of view
but also on whether one agrees or disagrees with
his policies. Historian Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr..
thought that President Kennedy exercised commendable presidential vigor when he made a unilateral decision to impose a naval blockade on Cuba to
induce the Soviets to remove missiles installed there.
However, he viewed President Nixon's decision to
extend U.S. military action in Vietnam into neighboring Cambodia as a deplorable example of the "imperial presidency."ll To be sure, there were important
differences between these two actions , but that is
precisely the pOint: a president strong enough to do
something that one thinks proper is also strong
enough to do something that one finds wrong.
The Supreme Court has fairly conSistently supported the view that the federal government has
powers in the conduct of foreign and military policy
beyond those specifically mentioned in the Constitution. The lead ing decision. rendered in 1936. holds
that the right to carry out foreign policy is an inherent attribute of any sovereign nation:
The power to declare and wage war, to conclude peace. to make treaties. to maintain
diplomatic relations with other sovereignties.
if they had never been mentioned in the Constitution, would have vested in the Federal
Government as necessary concomitants of
nationality.I 2

Tn 1962 President Kennedy forced the Soviet Union to withdraw
the missiles it had placed in Cuba alter their presence was
revealed by aerial photography.

The individual states have few rights in foreign
affairs.
Moreover, the Supreme Court has been most
reluctant to intervene in disputes over the cond uct of
foreign affairs. When various members of Congress
brought suit cha ll enging the right of President

The Constitutional and Legal Context
Nixon to enlarge the war in Vietnam without congressional approval, the court of appeals handled the
issue, as one scholar was later to describe it. with all
the care of porcupines making love. The Co urt sa id
that it was a matter for the president and Congress to
decide and that if Congress was unwilling to cut off
the money to pay for the war, it shou ld not expect the
courts to do the job for it. 13
The Supreme Court upheld the extraordinary
measures taken by President Linco ln during the Civil
War and rdused to interrere with the conduct of the
Vietnam War by Presidents Johnson and Nixon. I4
After Iran seized American hostages in 1979, President Carter froze Iranian assets in this country. To
win the hostages' freedom the president later agreed
to return some of these assets and to nullify claims
on them by American companies. The Court upheld
the nu llification beca use it was necessary for the resolution of a foreign policy dispute. IS
How great the deference to presidential power
may be is vividly illustrated by the actions of Presi-

dent Franklin Roosevelt in ordering the army to move
over one hundred thousand Japanese Americansthe great majority of them born in this country and
citizens of the United States-from their homes on
the West Coast to inland "relocation centers" for the
duration of World War II. Though this action was a
wholesale violation of the constitu tiona l rights of
U.S. citizens and was unprecedented in American
history. the Supreme Court decided that with the
West Coast vuln erable to attack by Japan, the president was within his rights to declare that people of
Japanese ancestry might pose a threat to internal
security; thus the relocation order was upheld. 16 (No
Japanese American was ever found gu ilty of espionage or sabotage.) One of the few cases in which the
Court denied the presid ent broad wartime powers
occurred in 1952 , when by a five-to-four vote it
reversed President Truman's seizure of the steel
mills- a move that he had made in order to avert a
strike that, in his view, would have imperiled the war
effort in Korea.] 7

Following the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1 942, President Roosevelt ordered that all Japanese
Americans living on the West Coast be interned in prison camps.

535

536

Chapter 20

Foreign and Military Policy

Rivalry Versus Cooperation: The President and the Senate
Because the Senate mu st ra tify trea ti es a nd consent to the appointment of ambassadors and other
high foreign policy officials, it has the opportunity
to playa large role in the conduct of foreign affa irs .
The key fi gure in the Senate is usually the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Co mm ittee.
Depending on personalities and circumstan ces,
the president and the chairman h ave sometimes
been able to work together closely but at other
times have been bitter, outspoken rivals. In genera l
cooperati on occurs when there is a widely shared
foreign po licy world view; rivalry erupts when
worldviews diverge.

Pe riods of Compet ing Worldvie ws and
Political Rivalry

President
Woodrow Wilson
Ly ndon B. Johnson
Richard M. Nixon
Bill Clinton

Chairman of Foreign
Relations Committee
Henry Cabot Lodge
(19 19- 19 24)
J. William Fulbright
(1959-19 75 )
J. William Fulbright
(195 9- 19 75)
Jesse Helms
(199 5- 1999)

Periods of Shared Worldvie w s and
Political Coopera tion
Chairman of Fo reign
Relations Committee
President
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Harr y S Truman

To m Con na lly (19411947,1949- 1953)
Arthur H. Vandenberg
(1947- 1949)

Checks on Presidential Power
If there is a check on the powers of the federa l governmen t or the president in foreign affa irs, it is
chiefly po litica l rather tha n co nstitutional. The most
importa nt check is Congress 's control of the purse
strings. In addi tion. Congress has imposed th ree
importa nt kinds of restrictions on the president's
freedom of acti on. all since Vietnam:
• limitations on the President's Ability to Give
Military or Economic Aid to Other Countries For
example, between 1974 a nd 1978 the president
could not sell anns to Turkey beca use of a dispute
between Turkey and Greece over co ntro l of the island
of Cyprus. The press ure on Congress fro m gro ups
supporting Greece was much stronger than that
from groups suppor ting Turkey. In 19 76 Congress
prevented President Ford from giving aid to the proWestern faction in the Ango la n civ il war. Until the
method was declared unconstitution al. Congress for
ma ny years could use a legislative veto. a resolution
disa pprov ing of an executive decision (see Chapter

15). to block the sale by the president of a rms wo rth
more tha n $25 million to another coun try.
• The War Powers Act Passed in 1973 over a
pres id en tia l veto, th is law placed the following
restrictions on the president's ability to use military
force:
• He must report in writing to Congress within
forty-eight hours after he in trod uces US. troops
into areas where hostilities have occur red or are
imminent.
• Within sixty days after troops are sent into hostile
situations, Congress must, by decl ara tion of war or
other specific statutory a uthorization. provide for
the continuation of hostile action by US. troops.
• If Congress fails to provide such a uthorization,
the president must withdraw the troops (unless
Co ngress has been prevented from meeting as a
result of an armed attack) .
• If Congress passes a concurrent resolution (which
the pres id ent may not veto) directing the remova l
of US. troops . the president must com ply.

The Machinery of Foreign Policy
The War Powers Act has had very little influence
on American military actions. Since its passage every
presid ent- Ford , Carter, Reagan , Bush, Cli nton, and
Bush the younger- has sent America n forces abroad
without any explicit cong ress ional authorization.
(Bush the eld er asked for that support when he
attacked Iraq and, by a narrow margin, received it.)
No pres ident has acknowledged that the War Powers
Act is constitutional. In its 1983 decision in the
Chadha case the Supreme Co urt struck down the legislative veto. which mea ns that this section of the act
is already in constitutional trouble. 18
Even if the act is constitutional, politically it is all
but impossible to use. Few members of Congress
would challenge a president who carried out a successful military operation (for example, those in
Grenada, Panama, and Afghanistan). More might
challenge the president if, after a while, the military
action were in trouble, but the easiest way to do that
would be to cut off funding for the operation. But
even during the Vietnam War, a conflict that preceded the War Powers Act. Congress, though it conta in ed many critics of U.S. policy. never stopped
mi li tary appropriations.
• Intelligence Oversight Owing to the low politica l stock of President Nixon during the Watergate
sca nd al and the revelations of ill ega l operations by
th e Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) within the
United States. Congress required that the CIA notify
appropriate congressional co mmittees about any
proposed covert action (between 1974 and 1980 it
had to notify eight different committees) . Today it
must keep two groups. the House and the Senate
Intelligence Committees, "fully and currently
informed" of all intelligence activities, including
covert actions. The committees do not have the
autho~'ity to disapprove such actions.
However, from time to time Congress will pass a
bill blocking particular covert actions. This happened
when the Boland Amendment (named after its sponsor, Representative Edward Boland) was passed on
several occasions between 1982 and 1985. Each version of the amendment prevented, for specifica lly
stated periods, intelligence agencies from supplying
military aid to the Nicarag uan contras. After the surprise terror ist attack on September 11 , there was an
investigation to find out why the CIA had not warned
the country of this risk.

The Machinery of Foreign
Policy
From the time that Thomas Jefferso n took the job in
Washington's first administration until well into the
twentieth century, foreign policy was often made and
almost always carried out by the secretary of state.
No more. When America beca me a major world
power during and after World War II. our commitments overseas expanded dramatically. With that
expansion two things happened. First, the president
began to put foreign policy at the top of his agenda
and to playa larger role in directing it. Second. that
policy was shaped by the scores of agencies (some
brand-new) that had acquired overseas activities.
Today Washington, D.C .. has not one State
Department but many. The Defense Department has
military bases and military advisers abroad. The Centra l Intelligence Agency has intelligence officers
abroad, most of them ass igned to "stations" that are
part of the American embassy but not under the
full co ntrol of the American ambassador there. The
Departments of Agriculture, Commerce. and Labor
have miss ions abroad. The Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Drug Enforcement Administration
have agents abroad. The Agency for International
Development has offices to dispense foreign aid in
host countries. The United States Information
Agency runs libraries, radio stations, and educa tional programs abroad.
Every new secretary of state bravely announces
that he or she is going to "coordinate" and "direct"
this enormous foreign policy establishment. He or
she never does. The reason is partly that the job is too
big for anyone person and partly that most of these
agencies owe no political or bureaucratic loyalty to
the secretary of state. If anyone is to coordinate
them, it will have to be the president. But the president cannot keep track of what all these organizations are doing in the more than 190 nations and 50
international organizations where we have representatives, or in the more than 800 international conferences that we attend each year.
So he has hired a staff to do the coordinating for
him. That staff is part of the Natio nal Security Council (NSC) , a co mmittee created by statute and chaired
by the preSident. whose members include by law the
vice pres ident and the secreta ri es of state and

537

538

Chapter 20

Foreign and Military Policy

LANDMARK CASES
Foreign Affairs
• Curtiss-Wright Export Corp. v. United States (1936): American foreign policy is vested
entirely in the federal government where the president has plenary power.
• Korematsu v. United States (1944): Sending Japanese Ame ricans to relocation centers
during World War II was based on an acceptable military justification.
• Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer (1952): The president may not seize factories
duri ng wart ime w ithout explicit congress ional authority even when they are threatened
by a strike .

defense, by custom the director of the CIA and the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a nd often the
attorney general. Depending on the president, the NSC
can be an importa nt body in which to ha mmer out
foreign policy. Attached to it is a staff headed by the
national security adv iser. That sta ff, which usua lly numbers a few dozen men and women, can be
(again, depending on the pres ident) an enormously
powerful instrument for formu lating a nd directin g
foreign poli cy.
Nomina lly that sta ff exists only to bring before the
president a bala nced accou nt of the views of the
heads of the major government agencies with a stake
in foreign po licy decisions, to help the president
choose among the options that these advisers identify, and to oversee the implementation of the presiden t's decisions . These decision s are usua lly in the
form of a Nationa l Security Decision Directive, or
SDD, signed by the president.
Presidents Truman and Eisenhower made only
limited use of the NSC staff, but beginning with President Kennedy it h as grown greatly in influence. Its
head, the national security adviser, has come to rival
the secretary of state for foreign policy leadership,
especially when th e adviser is a powerful personality
such as Henry Kissinger. President Reaga n attempted
to downgrade the importance of the nation al security adviser. but ironi ca lly it was one of his relatively
low-visibility appointees, Admira l John Poindexter,
a nd his subordinate, Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North,
who precipitated the worst crisis of the Reaga n presidency when, a lleged ly with out inform ing the president, they tried to use cash rea lized from the secret
sale of arms to Iran to finance guerri llas fighting

against the Marxist government of Nicaragua. The
sale a nd the diversion became known . orth was
fired, a congressional investigation ensued. criminal
charges were fil ed against Poindexter and North, and
the president's political position was weakened.
But even in ordinary times the NSC sta ff has been
the riva l of the secretary of state, except during that
period in the Ford administration when Henry
Kissinger held iJoth jobs.
Tbe way in which the macb inery of foreign po li cy
making operates has two major co nsequences for the
substa nce of that policy. First, as former secretary of
state George Shultz asserted, "It's never over." Foreign policy issues are endless ly agitated , ra rely settled. Tbe reaso n is that the rivalries within the
exec utive branch intensify th e ri va lries between th at
branch and Congress. In ways a lready described.
Congress has steadily increased its influence over the
co nduct of foreign policy. Anybody in the executive
branch who loses out in a struggle over foreign policy can take his or her case (usua lly by means of a
well-timed leak) to a sympathetic member of Congress, who tben can make a speech. hold a hearing.
or introduce a bill.
Second. the interests of the various organizations
making up the foreign policy establishment profoundly affect the pOS iti ons that they take. Because
the State Department bas a sta ke in diplomacy. it
tends to resist bold or co ntroversia l new policies that
might upset esta blished relationships with other
co untries. Part of the CIA has a stake in gathering
and a na lyzing information; that part tends to be
skepti ca l of the claims of other agencies that the ir
overseas operations a re succeeding. Another part of

Fo reign Policy and Pu/JIic Opinion

the CIA conducts covert operations abroad; it tends
to resent or ignore the skepticism of the intelligence
analysts. The air force flies airplanes a nd so tends to
be optimistic about what can be accomplished
through the use of air power in particula r a nd military power in general; the army. on the other hand .
wh ich must fight in the trenches. is often dubious
about the prospects for military success.
Americans often worry that their government is
keep ing secrets from them. In fact there are no
sec rets in Washington- at least not for long.

*

Foreign Policy and Public
Opinion
These organizationa l co nflicts shape the details of
foreign policy. but its broad outlines are shaped by
public and elite opinion.
World War II was the great watershed event in
American foreign policy. Before that time a clear
majority of the America n public opposed active
involvement in world affairs. The public saw the costs
of such involvement as being substantially in excess
of the benefits. and only determined. skillful lea ders
were able. as was President Rooseve lt during
1939-1940. to affect in even a limited fashion the
diplomatic and military struggles then co nvulsing
Europe and Asia.
Our par ticipation in the war produced a dramatic
shift in popular opinion that endured for three
decades. supplying broad (though often ambiguous)
public support for an internationalist foreign policy.
World War II had this effect. alone among all wars
that we have fought. for several reasons. First. it was
almost the only universally popular war in which we
have been engaged. one that produced few. if any.
recriminations afterward. Second. the war seemed
successful: an unmitigated evil (the Nazi regime) was
utterly destroyed; a n attack on our own land (by
Japan at Pearl Harbor) was thoroughly avenged.
Third. that war ended with the United States recognized as the dominant power on earth. owing to its
sole possession of the atomic bomb and its enormous
military and economic productivity.
In 1937. 94 percent of the American public prefer red the policy of doing "everything poss ibl e to
keep out of foreign wars" to the policy of doing
"everything possible to prevent war. even if it means

threatening to fight countries that fight wars. " In
1939. after World War II had begun in Europe but
before Pearl Harbor was attacked. only 13 percent of
Americans polled thought that we should enter the
war against Germany. Just a month before Pearl Harbor only 19 percent felt that the United States sbould
take steps. at the risk of war. to prevent Japan from
becoming too powerful. 19 Congress reflected the
noninterventionist mood of the country: in the summer of 1941. with war breaking out almost everywhere. tb e proposa l to continue the draft passed the
House of Representatives by only one vote.
The Japa nese attack on Pearl Harbor on December
7 changed all that. Not only was the American war
effort supported almost unanimously. not only did
Congress approve the declaration of war with only
one dissenting vote. but World War II- unlike World
War I- produced popu lar support for an active
assumption of internationa l responsibi li ties that
continued after the war bad en ded .2o Whereas after
World War I a majority opposed U.S. entry into th e
League of Nations. after World War II a clear majority favored our entry into the United Nations.21
This willingness to see the United States remain a
world force persisted. Even during the Vietna m War
the number of people thinking that we should "keep
independent" in world affairs as opposed to "working
closely with other nations" rose from 10 percent in
1963 to only 22 percent in 19 69. 22 In 19 67. after
more than two years of war in Vietnam. 44 percent
of Americans believed that this country had an obligation to "defend other Vietnams if they are threatened by communism."23
Before 9/11. hardly any American thought we
should fight a war in Afghanistan. but after that
attack we fought exactly that war in order to get rid
of the Taliban reg ime. The Taliban. a group of radica l young Musli ms. had ta ken co ntrol of that country and allowed Osama bin Laden. the head of al
Qaeda. to use the nation as a place to train and direct
terrorists. Though al Qaeda des igned and carried out
the 911 1 attacks on America. it is not a sin gle organization located in one place and thu s eas ily defeated.
It is instead a network of terrorist cells found all over
the world that is allied with other terrorist gro ups.
But the support for an internationalist American
foreign policy was. and is. highly general and heavily
dependent on the phrasing of poll questions. the
opinions expressed by popular leaders. and the
impact of world events. Public opinion. while more

539

540

Chapter 20

Foreign and Military Policy

Table 20.1

Popular Reactions to Foreign Policy Crises

Percentage of public saying that they approve of the way the president is handling his job

Foreign Policy Crisis
1960
1961
1962
1975
1979
1980
1983
1989
1990
1995
1999
2001
2003

American U-2 spy plane shot down over Soviet Union
Abortive landing at Bay of Pigs in Cuba
Cuban missile crisis
President Ford sends forces to rescue the American ship
American embassy in Teheran seized by Iranians
Failure of military effort to rescue hostages in Iran
U.S. invasion of Grenada
U.S . invasion of Panama
U.S. troops to Persian Gulf
U.S. troops to Bosnia
U.S. troops to Kosovo
U.S. combat in Afghanistan
U.S. invasion of Iraq

Before

After

62%
73
61
40
32
39
43
71
60
59
55
51
58

68%
83
74
51
61
43
53
80
75
54
51
86
71

Source: Updated from Theodore J. Lowi, The End of Liberalism (New York : Norton, 1969), 184. Poll data are

from Gallup poll. Time lapse between "before" and "after" samplings of opinion was in no case more than
one month .

internationalist than once was the case. is both
mushy and volatile. Just prior to President Nixon 's
decision to send troops into Cambodia , only 7 percent of the people said that they supported such a
move. After the troops were sent a nd Nixon made a
speech explaining his move, 50 perce nt of the public
said that they supported it. 24 Simil a rly, only 49 percent of the people favored haltin g the American
bombing of North Vietnam before President Johnson
ordered su ch a h alt in 1968; afterward 60 percent of
the people said that they supported such a policy.25

Backing the President
Much of this volatility in specific opinions (as opposed
to general mood) reflects the already-mentioned deference to the "commander in chief" and a desire to
support the United States when it confronts other
nations. Table 20.1 shows the proportion of people
who sa id that they approved of the way the president
was doing his job before and after various major foreign policy events. Each foreign crisis increased the
level of public approval of the president. often dramatically. The most vivid illustration of this was the
Bay of Pigs fiasco: an American-supported. American-directed invasion of Cuba by anti-Castro Cuban
emigres was driven back into the sea. President
Kennedy accepted responsibility for the aborted project. His popularity rose. (Comparable data for domestic crises tend to show no similar effect.)

This tendency to "rally round the nag " operates
for some but not all foreign military crises. 26 The
rally not only helped Kennedy after the Bay of Pigs,
but it also helped Ronald Reagan when he invaded
Grenada and George Bush the elder when he sent
troops to fight Iraq. But it did not help Bi ll Clinton
when he sent forces to Bosnia or launched bombing
attacks on Iraq. If there is an attack on America, the
president will do very well. Just before September 11 ,
2001. George Bush's favorability rating was 51 percent; just after the attack. it was 86 percent.
Sometimes people argue that whatever support a
president gets durin g a military crisis will disappear
once dead soldiers in body bags begin returning
home. There are two things wrong with this statement. First. dead so ldiers do not come home in body
bags: they come home in coffins. Second, a close
study of how casualty rates affect public opinion
showed that although deaths tend to reduce how
"favorable" people are toward a war, what they then
support is not withdrawal but an escalation in the
fi ghting so as to defeat the enemy more quickly. This
was true during Korea, Vietnam, and the Persian
Gulf WarP
In sum, people tend to be leery of overseas military expeditions by the United States-until they
start. Then they support them and want to win, even
if it means more intense fighting. When Ameri cans
began to dislike our involvement in Korea a nd Viet-

Foreign Policy and Public Opinion
nam, 28 they did not conclude that we should pull
out; they concluded instead that we should do whatever was necessary to win. The invasion of Iraq did
not raise large questions for Americans until terrorist attacks on the American military continued after
the Iraqi army had been defea ted.
Despite th e tendency for most Americans to rally
round the fl ag, there has been for many decades
some public opposition to a lm ost any war in which
the United States participates. About one-fifth of
Americans opposed our invadin g Iraq, about th e
sa me level of opposition to our wars in Korea and
Vietnam . Opposition has genera lly been highest
among Democrats, Afri can Ameri ca ns. and people
with a postgraduate degree.29
If this is how the public thinks, you might think
that a president wou ld be well advised to start a war to
boost his popularity. On occasion a president might
launch some cruise missiles against alleged terrorist
hideouts to look tough, but in general presidents do
not act so cynically. There is too much at stake.

Table 20.2
Percentage Agreeing
Public
Combating international
terrorism should be very
important
Protect jobs of American
workers
Reduce illegal immigration
Support U.S. troops in
Afghanistan
Use U.S. troops to defend South
Korea if attacked by North
Take Israel's side in conflicts
with Palestinians
Expand economic aid to other
countries

Leaders

71

84

78

41

59
60

21
92

43

82

17

15

8

61

Source: Global Views 2004 (C hicago: Chicago Council on Foreign
Relations, 2004).

Mass U?rsus Elite Opinion
The public is poorly informed about foreign affairs. It
probably has only a vague idea where Kosovo is, how
far it is from Baghdad to Kuwa it, or why the Palestinians and the Jews disagree about the future of Israel.
But that is to be expected. Foreign affairs are, well. foreign. They do not have much to do with the daily lives
of America n citizens, except during wartime.
But the public, since World War II. has consistently felt that the United States shou ld play an important interna tional role. 3D And if our troops go
abroad. it is a foolish politician who will try to talk
the public out of supporting them.
Political elites. however. have a different perspective. They are better informed abo ut foreign policy
issues, but their opinions are more likely to chan ge
rapidly. Initially. college-educated people gave more
support to the war in Vietnam than those without
college training; by the end of the war. however. that
support had decreased dramatically. Whereas the
average citizen was upset when the United States
seemed to be on the defensive in Vietnam, collegeedu cated voters tended to be more upset when the
United States was on the offensive.31
Though the average citizen did not want our military in Vietnam in the first place. he or she felt that
we should support our troops once they were there.
The average person also was deeply opposed to the

antiwar protests taking place on college campuses,
When the Chicago police roughed up antiwar
demon strators at the 1968 Democratic convention.
public sentiment was overwhelmingly on the side of
the police. 32 Contrary to myths much accepted at the
time. younger people were not more opposed to the
war than older ones, There was no "generation gap, "
By contrast. college-educated citizens, thinking at
first that troops should be involved , soon changed
their minds, decided that the war was wrong, and
grew increasingly upset when the United States
seemed to be enlarging the war (by invading Cambodia, for example), Co llege students protested against
the war largely on moral ground s, and their protests
received more support from college-educated adults
tha n from other citizens,
Elite opinion changes more rapidly than public
opinion. During the Vietnam War. upper-middleclass people who regularly read several magazines
and newspapers und erwent a dramatic change in
opinion between 1964 (when they supported the
war) and 19 68 (when they opposed it), But the views
of blue-collar workers scarcely changed at all. 33
The cleavage between mass and elite opinion is
even wider if you restrict the definition of elite to only
those involved in making foreign policy rather than
including all co llege-educated peopl e, In Table 20,2

541

54 2

Cl1apter 20

Foreign and Military Policy

we see the dlfferences in foreign policy views of a
cross section of American citizens and a group of
450 leaders active in government, academia, the
mass media, and various organizations concerned
with fore ign affairs. 34
In general the leaders have a more liberal and
internationalist outlook than the pub lic: they are
more likely to favor giving economic aid to other
countries and defending our allies. The public, on the
other hand, wants the United States to be less active
overseas and worries about protecting the jobs of
American workers. Accordingly, it wants the United
States to protect American jobs from foreign competition and give less economic aid to other nations.

*

Cleavages Among Foreign

Policy Elites
As we have seen, public opinion on foreign policy is
permissive and a bit mushy: it supports presidential
action without giving it much direction. Elite opinion
therefore acquires extraord inary importance. Of
course events and world realities are also important.
but since events have no mean ing except as they are
perceived and interpreted by people who must react
to them , the attitudes and beliefs of those people in
and out of government who are actively involved in
shaping foreign policy often assume decisive importance. Contrary to the views of people who think
that some shadowy. conspiratorial group of insiders
runs our foreign policy, the foreign po licy elite in this
country is deeply divided.
That elite consists not only of those people with
administrative positions in the foreign policy fie ldthe senior officials of the State Department and the
staff of the ational Security Council- but also the
members and staffs of the key congressional committees concerned with foreign affairs (chiefly the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House
International Relations Committee) and various private organizations that help shape elite opinion, such
as the members of the Council on Foreign Relations

worldviews A comprehensive opinion of how
the United States should respond to world
problems.

and the editors of two important publications. Foreign Affairs and Foreign Policy. To these must be added
infl uentia l co lumnists and editorial writers whose
work appears regularly in the national press. One
could extend the list by adding ever-wider circles of
people with some influence (lobbyists, professors,
leaders of veterans' organizations); this would complicate without changing the central point: elite
beliefs are probably more important in explain ing
foreign policy than in accounting for decisions in
other policy areas.

How a Worldview Shapes Foreign Policy
These beliefs can be described in simplified terms as
w orldviews (or, as some social scientists put it. as
paradigms)-more or less comprehensive mental
pictures of the critical problems facing the Un ited
States in the world and of the appropriate and inappropriate ways of responding to these problems. The
clearest. most concise, and perhaps most influential
statement of one worldview that held sway for many
years was in an article published in 1947 in Foreign
Affairs, titled "The Sources of Soviet Conduct."35
Written by a "Mr. X" (later revealed to be George F.
Kennan, director of the Policy Planning Staff of the
State Department and thereafter ambassador to
Moscow). the article argued that the Russians were
pursuing a policy of expansion that cou ld only be
met by the United States' applyin g "una lterable
counterforce at every point where they show signs of
encroaching upon the interests of a peaceful and
stable world. " This he called the strategy of "containment. " and it became the governing principle of
American foreign policy for at least two decades.
There were critics of the containment policy at
the time-Wa lter Lippmann, in his book The Cold
War, argued against it in 194 7 36- but the criticisms
were less influential than the doctrine. A dominant
worldview is important precisely because it preva ils
over alternative views. One reason why it prevails is
that it is broad ly consistent with the public's mood.
In 1947, when Kennan wrote, popular attitudes
toward the Soviet Union, favorable durin g World
War II when Russia and America were all ies, had
turned quite hostile. In 1946 less than one-fourth of
the American people believed that Russia could be
trusted to cooperate with th is country, 37 and by
1948 over three-fourths were convinced that the
Soviet Union was trying not simply to defend itself
but to become the dominant world power. 38

Cleavages Among Foreign Policy Elites
Such a worl dview was also infl uential because it
was consistent with events at the time: Russia had
occupied most of the previously independent countries of Eastern Europe and was turning them into
puppet regimes. When governments independent of
both the United States and the Soviet Union attempted to rule in Hungary and Czechoslovakia. they were
overthrown by Soviet-backed coups. A worldview
also becomes dominant when it is consistent with the
prior experiences of the people holding it.
Four Worldviews Every generation of political
leaders comes to power with a foreign policy worldview shaped. in large measure, by the real or apparent
mistakes of the previous generation. 39 This pattern can be traced back, some have argued. to the
very beginnings of the nation. Frank L. Klingberg
traces the alteration since 1776 between two national "moods " that favored first "extroversion" (or an
active. internationalist policy) and then "introversion" (a less active. even isolationist posture).40
Since the 1920s Amer ican eli te opinion has
moved through four dominant worldviews: isolationism, conta inment (or antiappeasement). disengagement, and human rights. Isolationism was the view
adopted as a result of our unhappy experience in
World War I. Our efforts to help European allies had
turned sour: thousands of American troops had been
killed in a war that had seemed to accomplish little
and certainly had not made the world, in Woodrow
Wilson's words, "safe for democracy." As a result in
the 1920s and 1930s elite opinion (and popular
opinion) opposed getting involved in European wars.
The c ontainme n t (or antiappeasement) paradigm was the result of World War II. Pearl Harbor
was the death knell for isolationism. Senator Arthur
H. Vandenberg of Michigan, a staunch isolationist
before the attack, became an ardent internationalist
not only during but after the war. He later wrote of
the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7,
1941. "that day ended isolationism for any realiSt. "41 At a conference in Munich, efforts of British
and French leaders to satisfy Hitler's territorial
demands in Europe had led not to "peace in our
time," as Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain of Britai n had claimed, but to ever-greater territorial
demands and ultimately to world war. This crisis
brought to power men determined not to repeat their
predecessors ' mistakes: "Munich" became a synonym for weakness, and leaders such as Winston
•

A meeting that named an era: In Mun ich in 1938 British
prime minister Neville Chamberlain attempted to appease
the territorial ambitions of Hitlel: Chamberlain's failure
brought World War II closel:

Churchill made anti appeasement the basis of their
postwar policy of resisting Soviet expansionism.
Churchill summed up the worldview that he had
acquired from the Munich era in a famous speech
delivered in 1946 in Fulton, Missouri, in which he
coined the term iron curtain to describe Soviet policy
in Eastern Europe.
The events leading up to World War II were the
formative experiences of those leaders who came to
power in the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s. What they
took to be the lessons of Pearl Harbor and Munich
were applied repeatedly- in building a network of

isolationism The opinion that the United
States should withdraw from world affairs.
containment The belief that the United States
should resist the expansion of aggressive
nations, especially the former Soviet Union.

543

544

Chapter 20

Foreign and Military Policy

The battlesh ip West Virginia burns after being hit by Japan ese
warplanes at Pearl Harbor on Decelllber 7. 1941.

defensive alliances in Europe and Asia during the late
1940s and 1950s, in operating an airlift to aid West
Berlin when road access to it was cut off by the Russians. in coming to the aid of South Korea, and
finally in intervening in Vietnam. Most of these
applications of the containment worldview were successful in the sense that they did not harm American
interests , they proved welcome to allies, or they prevented a military conquest.
The di sen gagem e nt (or "Vietnam") view resu lted
from the experience of the younger foreign policy elite
that came to power in the 19 70s. Unlike previous applications of the antiappeasement view, our entry into
Vietnam had led to a military defeat and a domestic
political disaster. There were three ways of interpreting
that crisis: (1) we applied the correct worldview in the
right place but did not try hard enough; (2) we had the
correct worldview but tried to apply it in the wrong
place under the wrong circumstances; (3) the worldview itself was wrong. By and large the critics of our

The belief th at the United
States was harmed by its war in Vietnam and
so should avoid supposedly similar events.
human rights The view that we should t ry t o
improve th e lives of peopl e in oth er countries.

di sengagement

Vietnam policy tended toward the third conclusion.
and thus when they supplanted in office the architects
of our Vietnam policy, they inclined toward a worldview based on the slogan "no more Vietnams." Critics
of this view called it the "new isolationism," arguing
that it would encourage Soviet expansion.
The language of Vietnam colored ma ny discussions of foreign policy. Almost every military initiative since then has been debated in terms of whether
it would lead us into "another Vietnam": sending the
Marines to Lebanon, invading Grenada. dispatching
military advisers to EI Salvador, supporting the contras in Nicaragua. helping South American countries fight drug producers. send ing troops to the
Persian Gulf to force Iraq to abandon its invasion of
Kuwait, sending troops to Somalia, and using American air power in Bosnia.
How elites thought about Vietnam affected their
foreign policy views for many years. If they thought
the war was "immoral." they were reluctant to see
American mi litary invo lvement elsewh ere. They
played a large role in the Carter administration but
were replaced by rival elites-those more inclined to
a containment view-during the Reagan presidency.42 When George H.W. Bush sought to expel Iraqi
troops from Kuwait. the congressional debate pitted
those committed to containment against those who
believed in disengagement. The Senate vote on
Bush's request for permission to use troops was narrowly carried by containment advocates.
When Clinton became president in 1992, he
brought to office a lack of interest in foreign policy
coupled with advisers who were drawn [rom the ranks
of those who believed in disengagement. His strongest
congreSSional supporters were those who had argued
against the Gulf War. But then a remarkable change
occurred. When Siobodan Milosevic, the Serbian
leader. sent troops into neighboring Kosovo to suppress the ethnic Albanians living there, the strongest
voices for American military intervention came [rom
those who once advocated disengagement. Representative David Bonior, the minority whip in the House,
who had voted against fighting Iraq 's Saddam Hussein, now spoke out in favor of fighting Milosevic. During the Gulf War 47 Senate Democrats voted to oppose
U.S. participation. A few years later 42 Senate Democrats voted to support our role in Kosovo.
What had happened? The change was inspired by
the view that helping the Albanians was required by
the doctrine of huma n righ ts. Liberal supporters of

The Use of Military Force

u.s. air attacks on Serbian forces believed that we
were helping Albanians escape mass killing. By contrast, many conser vative members of Congress who
had followed a containment policy in the Gulf War
now felt that disengagement ough t to be followed in
Kosovo. Of co urse politics also mattered. Clinton was
a Democratic president; Bush had been a Republican one.
But politics was not the whole story. American liberal elites had persuaded themselves that the attack
in Kosovo resembled the genocid e- that is, the mass
murder of people because of their race or ethnicitythat the Jews had suffered in Nazi Germany. They
held that we must "never again" permit a whole people to be killed.
There are some problems with this view. Hardly
a ny human rights advocates had call ed for U. S. interven tion in Rwand a, China, or the Soviet Union-ali
countries that massacred millions of their own citizens. In addition, the hi storical record suggests that
the Serbs and the Albanians have been killing each
other for centuries. Now that the Serbian army has
withd rawn fr om Kosovo , Serbian civilia ns who
stayed behind are being killed by the Albani ans
whom they once killed. The response that some
hum an rights advocates would give to these cri ticisms is that America owes a special obligation to
Europe and that even if Albanians kill Serbs, a Western military presence there will at least prevent
organized mili tary killin g.
In the aftermath of 9111, a new issue has arisen
that may divide foreign policy elites in the future.
Should the United States "go it alone" against its enemies abroad, or do so only on the basis of a broad
coalition of supporting nations? President Bush the
elder assembled just such a coalition to force Iraq out
of Kuwa it, but Presid ent Bush the younger acted
almost alone in invading Afghanistan to destroy the
Taliban, though he received crncial support from
Great Britain, Australia , and Poland.

. The Use of Military Force
Foreign policy takes many forms- discussions are
held , treaties are signed, organizations are joinedbut in many cases it depends on the ability to use military force. Troops, ships, an d aircraft are not the
only ways of influencing other co untries; inter na-

545

Third World

Originally a French term (tiers monde) referring to
nations neutral in the cold war between the United Nations and the Soviet Union, the Third World
now means almost any underdeveloped nation in
Africa, Asia, Latin America, or the Middle East.
When the oil-producing nations, such as Saudi
Arabia, became wealthy after having succeeded in
raising oil prices in the early 1970s, some
observers began to use a new phrase, the Fourth
World, to refer to underdeveloped nations that
had no oil reserves and thus had to pay heavily
for imported oil.
And some nations, such as Taiwan and the
Republic of Korea, once thought to be part of the
Third World because they were underdeveloped
have made such startling economic progress that
they are now referred to as the "newly industrialized nations" (NINs) .
Source: Adapted from Safire's Political Dictionary by William Safire.
Copyright © 1968, 1972, 1978 by William Safire . Reprinted by permission of Random House, Inc. and the author.

tional trade and foreign aid are also useful. But in
modern times, as in the past, the nations of the world
know the difference between a "great power" (that is,
a heavily armed one) and a weak nation.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end
of the co ld war, one might think that military power
has beco me less important. But in fact it remains as
impor ta nt as ever. Since the Soviet Union was dissolved and the Berlin Wall came down in 1989 , the

5 46

Chapter 20

Foreign (lnd Military Policy

U.S. Military Intervention in the Middle East

UZBE KISTAN

as peacekeeping force;
withdrawn in 1984.

MEDITERRANEAN
SEA

U.S. troops, together with
those from other countries,
forced Iraq to end its invasion
of Kuwait.
Riyadh"

1984:

SAUDI
ARABIA

SUDAN

INDIAN OCEAN

SOMA LIA

United States has used military force to attack Iraq .
ma intain order in Bosnia. defend Kosovo. and go to
war in Afghan istan. Various rogue nations, such as
Iran and North Korea, have acquired or are about to
acquire long-range rockets and weapons of mass
destruction (that is, nuclea r, chemical, and biologica l
arms). Many nations that feel threatened by their
neighbors. such as China. India. Pakistan. and Israel,
have nuclear bombs. And Russia still has many of
the nuclear weapons that the old Soviet Union bu ilt.
It would be foolish to assume that the end of the cold
war means the end of war.

There are two views about the role of the military
in American life. On e is maj oritarian: the military
exists to defend the co untry or to help other nation s
defend themselves. When troops are used, almost a ll
Americans benefit and a lmost a ll pay the bill. (So me
Americans. such as those who lose a loved one in
war, pay mu ch more than the rest of us. ) The president is th e commander in chief, and Congress plays a
large ly supportive role.
Although the other view does not deny that the
armed forces are useful, it focuses on the extent to
whi ch the military is a large and powerful client. The

The Defe nse Budget

u.s. Military Intervention

547

in Central America and the Caribbean Since 1950

UN ITED STATE S

y-

GULF OF MEXICO
1962: U.S. naval blockade of Cuba
to prevent insta ll ation of
Soviet missi les .

-

A TLANTIC OCEAN

1965 : U.S. troops occupy
Domini ca n Repub lic
to bloc k takeover by
Comm unist regime.

VIRGIN
ISLANDS
(~.S.)

"

.

CARIBBEAN SEA
1954 : U.S. helps overthrow
Marxist government
in Guatemala.

CIA sup ports ant igovernment guerri ll as
inN icaragua.

GRE NADA ,

198 1:

PACIFIC OCEAN

198 9:

real beneflcia ries of military spending are the general s a nd admirals. as well as the big corporations and
members of Congress whose districts get fat defense
contracts. Everyone pays . but these clients get most
of the beneflts. What we spend on defense is sh aped
by the military-industrial complex, a supposed ly
unifi ed bloc of Defense Department leaders and military manufacturers. A good exa mple of the waste
this enta il s, people wi th this view allege, can be
found in stories about the mi litary buying $43 5
hamm ers.

The Defense Budget
To sort out these competing cl aims, on e has to
und erstand how America ra ises a nd spend s its
defense doll ars. There a re two important things to
kn ow: how much money we spend and how it is

CO LOMB IA

VE NEZU ELA

divided up. The first renects majorita rian po litics, the
second , interest group bargaining.

Total Spending
Throughout most of our history the United States
h as not maintained large military forces during
peaceti me. For instance, the percentage of the gross
national product (GNP) spent on defense in 193 5, on
the eve of World War II, was about the same as it was
in 1870 , when we were on the eve of nothing in particula r. 43 We a rmed when a wa r broke out, then
we disa rmed when the war end ed. But all of that
ch a nged after World War II, when defense spendin g

military-industrial complex

An alleged
alliance between m ilitary leaders and corporate lead ers .

548

Chapter 20

Foreign and Military Policy

Duril1g the cold IVai; lIlilitary spending rose as the United States
reacted to the challenge raised by the Soviet Ul1iol1.

declin ed sharply but did not return to its prewar levels. And in 19 SO our defense expenditures soared
again.
In that year we rea rmed to fi ght a war in Korea.
but when it was over, we did not completely disann .
The reason was our containment policy toward the
Soviet Un ion. For about forty years-from the outbrea k of the Korean War in 19 SO to the coll apse of
the Soviet Union in 1991- Ameri can military
spending was driven by our desire to co ntain the
Soviet Union an d its a llies. The Soviet Union had
brought under its contro l most of Eastern Europe:
would it also invade Western Europe? Russia h ad
always wanted access to the oil and warm-water
ports of the Middle East: wo uld the Soviets someday
invade or subvert Iran or Turkey? The Soviet Union
was willing to help orth Korea invade South Korea
and orth Vietnam to invade South Vietnam; would
it next use an ally to threaten the United States? Soviet leaders supported "wars of national liberation" in
Africa a nd Latin America; would they succeed in
turning more and more nations against the United
States?
To meet these threats the United States built up a
military system that was designed to repel a Soviet
invasion of Western Europe and at the same time
help allies resist small er-scale invasions or domestic
uprisings. Figure 20.1 depicts the dramatic in crease
in milita ry spending in 19 SO . It also shows that even
after we decided to have a large mil itary force, there
were many ups and downs in the actual level of
spending. After the Korean War was over, we spent

less; when we became invo lved in Vietnam, we spent
more; when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanista n,
we spent more again. These changes in spending
tended to refl ect changes in public opini on about the
defense bud get.
As Figure 20 .2 shows, a majority of Americans
have said that we are spending the right a mount or
even too little on defense, a nd that percentage rose to
very high levels in 1980 (when the Soviet Union
invaded Afghanistan) , in 1991 (when Iraq invaded
Kuwait) , and in 2001 after the terrorist attack on
America.
Then. suddenly, the Soviet Union ceased to exist.
The troops that once occupied Eastern Europe and
Afghanistan withdrew to Russia: there were huge
cuts in Russian military spending; and military and
economic aid to the Soviets' longtime ally, Cuba, was
suspended. For the fir st time since 19 SO American
leaders were faced with defining the principles of our
military policy (and thus the size of our defense
budget) in the absence of a Soviet threat.
The debate that occurred, and is still continuing ,
largely refl ected personal beliefs a nd political ide010gies 44 (that is, majoritarial1 politics). Liberals
demanded sha rp cuts in defense spendin g, weapons
procurement, a nd military personn el, arguing that
with the Soviet threat ended, it was time to the coll ect
our "peace dividend " a nd diver t fund s from the military to domestic social programs. Co nservatives
agreed that so me military cuts were in order, but
they argued that the world was still a da ngerous
place and therefore that a strong (a nd well-funded )
military remained essential to the nation's defense.
This di sag reement reflected different predictions
about wh at the future would be like. Many liberals
(and some conservatives, such as Pat Buchanan ,
who believed that America should "stay at home")
argued that we cou ld not afford to be the "world 's
policeman. " Many co nservatives (and some liberals)
responded by saying th at Russia was still a military
powerhouse that mi ght once again fall under the
control of ruthless lea ders a nd that many other
nations hostil e to the United States (such as North
Korea , Iran . a nd Iraq ) were becomin g potential
adversar ies as they tried to build or acquire nuclear
weapo ns and missile systems.
Saddam Hu ssein soon proved that international
aggress ion had not ended with the collapse of the
Soviet Union. In 1990 Iraq invaded Kuwait, a small
oil-producing co untry on the Persian Gulf. The

The Defense Budget
Figure 20.1

549

Trends in Military Spending (in constant dollars)

1000
c::

Ui

z
ex:
w

c::
u
w

c::

800

0

ex:
;;;

(/)

w

Z

(!)

ex:

:::;

(/)

(/)

f-

z
ex:

700

(!)

W

:;:

::;;:

-'

:J

(/)

f-

~

'"

u..

~

ex:

-'

ex:
;;;

e:

::;;:
Z

c::

z
ex:

c::

(/)

ex:

;;;

900

c::

0

W
CL

I

<Xl

:J
U
Vl

J§

600

0

"0

a

500

Vl

<=

.2
<Xl

400
300
200
100

1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2003

Source. Office of th e Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), " National Defense Budget Estimates for FY

2003."

United States, aided by troops from severa l nations,
landed in nea rby Saudi Arab ia. In January 1991
Operation Desert Storm began. Within days Iraq 's
forces were driven out of Kuwait.
In 1999 Serbian forces led by Slobodan Milosevic
moved into Kosovo-a province that, like Serbia, had
been part of Yugoslavia- to suppress the Albanians
who lived there. The United States and its European
allies launched a series of air attacks against Serbia.
After several weeks the Serbian military withdrew.
These campa igns made clear that whether or not
the United States was the "world 's policeman, " there
was no escaping its need to use military force. The
Kosovo campaign also made clear that the United
States had redu ced its armed forces so sharply since
Desert Storm (there were ha lf a mi ll ion fewer people
in th e milita ry in 1996 tha n in 1991) that it was
hard-pressed to carry out any sustained military
campa ign (see Table 20.3) . When the nationa l bud get defi cit was eliminated in 1999 , both President
Clinton and the Repub li ca n Congress called for more
military spending.

But that increase did not pay for what the mi litary
had been authorized to buy. and did little to get us
ready for the war in Afghanistan aga inst Osa ma bin
Laden. But once the battle began, the federal purse
strings loosened and the defense budget grew.

What Do

we Get with Our Money?

We get people, of course-soldiers, sailors, airmen,
and airwomen. They are the most expensive part of
the defense budget. Then we get hardware of roughly two kinds- big-ticket items, like aircraft carriers
and bombers, a nd small-ticket items , like hammers
and screwdrivers. Each of these kinds of hardware
has its own politics. Fin ally, we get "readiness"training, supplies, munitions, fuel. a nd food.
Personnel Effor ts to develop our military forces
before World Wa r II reflected the co nsiderable America n discomfort with a strong central government.
The United States did not institute a peacetime draft
until 1940, when the rest of the world was already at
war, and the draft was renewed the following year
•

550

Chapter 20

Figure 20.2
-

Foreign and Military Policy

Public Sentiment on Defense Spending, 1960-2002
Too little/a bout right

-

Too muc h

90
80
70

60
<lJ

llI'

C

50

<lJ

U

~ 40
30
20

10

1973

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2002

Source: Updated from The Public Perspective (AugusVSeptember 1997), 19, and Gallup Poll.

Forces Before and Afte~

Service

Before 1991

End FY 1998

18
10

10
8

15
1
546

11
2
346

24
12

13
7

3

3

31
324
1,000

18
182
550

Army
Active divisions
National Guard divis ions
Navy
Aircraft carriers
Training carriers
Ships
Air Force
Active fighter wings
Reserve fighter wings
Marine Corps
Active divisions
Reserve divisions
Strategic Nuclear Forces
Ballistic missile submarines
Strategic bombers
ICBMs

Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States,

1998, 363.

(on ly a few months before Pearl Harbor) by only a
one-vote margin in the House. Until 1973 the United
States relied on the draft to obtain military personnel. Then, at the end of the Vietnam War, it replaced
th e draft with the a ll -volunteer force (AVF). After getting off to a rocky start, the AVF began to improve
thanks to increases in military pay and rising civilian
unemployment. Abolishing the draft had been politica lly popular: nobody likes being drafted, and even in
congressional districts that otherwise are staunch
supporters of a strong defense, the voters tell their
representatives that they do not want to return to
the draft.
There has been a steady increase in the percentage of women in the military (in 1999 they constituted 14 percent of the tota l). For a long time,
however, women were barred by law from serving in
combat roles. (What constitutes a "combat role" is a
bit difficult to say, since even personnel far from the
main fighting can be hit by an enemy bomb or
artil lery shelL ) In 1993 Congress ended the lega l ban
on assigning wo men to navy co mbat ships and air
force fighter jets, and by 1994 between four hundred
a nd five hundred women were serving on three aircraft carriers. Congress must sti ll be consulted in
advance if women are to serve in ground combat

The Defense Budget

Women in training for the armedforces.
The United States has tried to decide whether to build
interceptors like this one to shoot down incoming missiles
from enemies.

forces (such as in front- line infantry or tank units),
but soon they may be in those positions as well.
The presence of homosexuals in the military has
proved much harder to resolve. Until 1993 it was the
long-standing policy of the U.S. armed forces to bar
homosexuals from en tering the military and to discharge them if they were discovered serving. Gay
and lesbian rights organizations had long protested
this exclusion. In 1993 a gay soldier won a lawsuit
against the army for having discharged him; he settled for back pay and retirement benefits in exchange
for a promise not to reenlist. In 1993 a judge ordered
the navy to reinstate a discharged sailor who had
revealed on national television that he was a homosexual. In response to the growing controversy, presidential cand idate Bill Clinton promised to lift the
official ban on gays and lesbians serving in the military if he were elected to office.
Once in office he discovered that it was not that
easy. Many members of the armed forces believed
that knowingly serving alongside and living in close
quarters with gays and lesbians would create unnecessary tension and harm military morale and troop
solidarity. The Joint Chiefs of Staff opposed lifting the
ban, and several key members of Congress said they
would try to pass a law reaffirming it. President Clinton was forced to settle for a compromise: "don't ask,
don't tell. " Under this policy persons entering or
serving in the military will not be asked to reveal

their sexual orientation and will be allowed to serve,
provided they do not engage in homosexual conduct.
If a person says he or she is a homosexual. it will not
be automatic grounds for discharge, but it may be
grounds for launching an investigation to see
whether rules against homosexual conduct have
been violated.
In 1994 the new Pentagon rules designed to
implement "don't ask, don't tell" went into effect, but
they created their own problems. What if heterosexuals harass gays without asking if they are gay ?
What if a gay or lesbian doesn 't tell but his or her
commanding officer finds out anyway ?
Whenever the Pentagon buys a
new submarine, airplane, or missile, we hear about
c ost overruns. In the 19 50s actual costs were three
times greater than estimated costs; by the 1960s
things were on ly slightly better- actual costs were
twice estimated costs. 45
There are five main reasons for these overruns.
First, it is hard to know in advance what something
that has never existed before will cost once you build
it. People who have remodeled their homes know this
all too well. So do government officials who build
new subways or congressional office buildings. It is
no different with a B-2 bomber.

•

Big-Ticket Items

cost overruns When the money actually paid
to military suppliers exceeds the estimated
costs.

5 51

552

Chapter 20

Foreign and Military Policy

Gays campaign Jor greater acceptance in the armedJorces.
Second, people who wa nt to persuade Congress to
appropriate money for a new a irpl a ne or submarin e
have a n incentive to underestimate the cost. To get
the weapon approved, its sponsors tell Co ngress how
little it will cost; once the weapon is und er constru ction, the sponsors go ba ck to Co ngress for additi ona l
money to cover "unexpected" cost increases.
Third , the Pentagon officials who decide what
kind of new aircraft they want are drawn from the
ranks of those who will fly it. These offi cers naturally want the best airplane (or ship or tank) that money
can buy. As air force general Ca rl "Tooey" Spaatz
once put it, "A second-best aircraft is like a secondbest poker hand . No da mn good ."46 But what exactly is the "best" airplane? Is it the fastest one? Or the
most maneuverable one? Or the most reliable one? Or
the one with the longest range? Pentagon officia ls
have a tendency to answer, "All of the above." Of
course, trying to produ ce a ll of the above is incredibly expens ive (and sometimes imposs ible) . But asking
for the expensive (or the impossible) is understandable, given that the a ir force offi cers who buy it will
also fly it. This tendency to ask for everythin g at once
is called gold plati n g,
Fo urth, many new weapons are purchased from a
single contractor. Thi s is called sole-so urcing. A con-

The tendency of Pentagon offi cials to ask weapons contractors to meet excessively hi gh requirements.

gold pla ting

tractor is hired to design, develop, and build an airplane. As a result there is no co mpeti tion, and so the
manufacturer has no strong incentive to control
costs. And if the sole manufacturer gets into financial trouble, the government, seeking to avoid a shu tdown of all production, has an incentive to ba il the
compa ny out.
Fifth, when Congress wants to cut the military
bud get, it often does so not by ca nceling a new
weapons system but by stretching out the number of
years during which it is purchased. Say that Congress wants to buy one hundred F-14s, twenty-five a
year for four years. To give the appearance of cutting
the budget, it will decide to buy only fifteen the first
year and take five years to buy the rest. Or it will
a uthorize the co nstruction of twenty now a nd then
ask aga in next yea r for th e authority to buil d more.
But start-and-stop production decisions and stretching out production over more years drives up the cost
of buildin g each uni t. If Ford built ca rs this way. it
would go broke.
There are ways to cope with four of these five
problems. You cannot do much about the first, ignorance, but you can do something about low estimates, gold plating, sole-sourcing, and stretch-outs.
H the Pentagon would give realistic cost estimates
initially (perhaps verified by another agency); if it
would ask for weapons that meet a few critica l performance requirements instead of every requirement
that can be thought of; if two or more manufacturers
were to compete in designing, developing. and manufa cturing new weapons; and if Congress were to
stop trying to "cut" the bud get using the smoke-andmir rors technique of stretch-outs, then we would
hear a lot less about cost over runs .
Some of these things are being done. There is more
competition and less sole-sourcing in weapons procurement today than once was the case. 47 But
the poli tica l incentives to avoid other changes are very
powerful. Pentagon oflkers will always want "the
best." They will always have an incentive to understate
costs. Congress will a lways be tempted to use stretchouts as a way of avoiding hard budget choices.
• Small-Ticket Items It may be easy to understand
why jet fighters cost so much , but what about $435
hammers?
In fact there never was a $435 hamm er. It was a
myth. The myth grew out of a compl icated Pentagon
accountin g procedure that was expl oited for publici-

The Structure of Defel1se Decis;ol1-Maldl1g

ty purposes by a member of Congress who thought
he had found a hot issue.
The issue in buying small-ticket items is not the
hammer problem, it is the coffee maker problem.
Everybody knows what a hammer is and where to
buy one-for about $20, tops. But a coffee maker, if
it is especially designed to function on a military plane, is
another matter. If the plane is going to lurch about in
rough air, if the coffee maker has to fit into an odd
place, it will occur to somebody in the Pentagon that
what is needed is a specially designed coffee maker.
Once somebody thinks like that, the coffee maker
is purchased in the same way as a new jet fighter, and
with results just as bad . The design is gold-plated
(for example. "Let's have a coffee maker that can fly
upside down "), the contract is let out to a sole source
with no competition, the cost is underestimated, and
the production run is limited to ten coffee makers.
The result? A coffee maker that costs $7,600.48
• Readiness Presumably we have a peacetime military so that we will be ready for wartime. Presumab ly, therefore, the peacetime forces will devote a lot of
their time and money to improving their readiness.
ot necessarily. The politics of defense spending is
such that readiness often is given a very low priority.
Here is why.
Client politics influences the decision. In 1990
Congress was willing to cut almost anything, provided it wasn't built or stationed in some member's
district. That doesn't leave much. Plans to stop producing F-14 fighters for the navy were opposed by
members from Long Island, where the Grumman
manufacturing plant is located. Plans to kill the
Osprey aircraft for the Marines were opposed by
members from the places where it was to be built.
Plans to close bases were opposed by every member
with a base in his or her district.
That leaves training and readiness. These things ,
essential to military effectiveness, have no constituencies and hence few congressional defenders.
When forced to choose, the services themselves often
prefer to allocate scarce dollars to developing and
buying new weapons than to spending for readiness.
Moreover, the savings from buying less fuel or having
fewer exercises shows up right away, whi le the savings from canceling an aircraft carrier may not show
up for years. Not surprisingly, training and readiness
are usually what get the ax.

• Bases At one time the opening and closing of
military bases was pure client politics, which meant
that a lot of bases were opened and hardly any were
closed. Almost every member of Congress fought to
get a base in his or her district, and every member
fought to keep an existing base open. Even the biggest
congressional critics of the u.s. military, people who
would vote to take a gun out of a soldier's hand ,
would fight hard to keep bases in their districts open
and operating.
In 1988 Congress finally concluded that no base
would ever be closed unless the system for making
decisions was changed. It created a Commission on
Base Realignment and Closure, consisting of private
citizens (originally twelve, later eight) who would
consider recommendations from the secretary of
defense. By law Congress would have to vote within
forty-five days for or against the commission's list as
a who le, without having a chance to amend it. In
1989 Congress considered the commission's first
report, which called for closing eighty-six bases and
slimming down five others. With no chance to pick
the bases the members wanted to protect and knowing that the country had more bases than it needed ,
Congress let the report stand, and the closings began.
In 1991 it went through the same process again,
finally voting to accept (technically, voting not to
block) a commission report calling for closing thirtyfour more bases and altering many others.
Congress, it appears, has flnally figured out how to
make some decisions that most members know are
right but that each member individually finds it politically necessary to oppose. But opposition to base closings remains strong enough to create congressional
resistance to forming more Base Realignment and
Closure commissions. In 2001 , Congress authorized
a new one but told it not to report until 2005.

The Structure of Defense
Decision-Making
The formal structure within which decisions about
national defense are made was in large part created
after World War II, but it reflects concerns that go
back at least to the time of the Found ing. Chief
among these is the persistent desire by citizens to
ensure civilian control over the military.

553

554

Chapter 20

Foreign and Military Policy

The ational Security Act of 1947 and its su bsequent amendments created the Department of
Defense. It is headed by the secretary of defense.
under whom serve the secretaries of the army. the air
force , and the navy as well as the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The secretary of defense, who must be a civ ili an
(though one former general. George C. Marshall, was
allowed by Congress to be the secretary), exercises.
on behalf of the president. command authority over
the defense establishment. The secretary of the army.
the secretary of the navy,* and the secretary of the
air force a lso are civilians and are subordinate to the
secretary of defense. Unlike him, they do not attend
cabinet meetings or sit on the National Security
Council. In essence they manage the "housekeeping"
functions of the various armed services, under the
general direction of the secretary of defense and his
deputy and assistant secretaries of defense.
The four armed services are separate entities; by
law they cannot be merged or commanded by a single military officer, and each has the right to communicate directly with Congress. There are two
reasons for having separate uniformed services functioning within a single department: the fear of many
citizens that a unified military force might become
too powerful politically, and the desire of each service
to preserve its traditional independence and autonomy. The result. of course, is a good deal of interservice rivalry and bickering, but this is precisely what
Congress intended when it created the Department of
Defense. Rivalry and bickering. it was felt. would
ensure that Congress wou ld receive the maximum
amount of information about military affairs and
would enjoy the largest opportunity to affect military
decisions.
Since the end of World War II Congress has aimed
both to retain a significant measure of control over
the military 's decision-making and to ensure the
adequacy of the nation's defenses. Congress does
not want a single military command headed by an
a ll-powerful general or admiral. but neither does it
want the services to be so autonomous or their
heads so equal that coordination and efficiency suffer. In 1986 Congress passed and the president
signed a defense reorganization plan known as the
Go ld water-Nichols Act. which increased the power

of the officers who coordinate the activities of the
different serv ices. The 1947 structure was left in
place. but with revised procedures.

Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) is a committee cons istin g of the uniformed heads of each of the military
serv ices (the army. navy. air force. and Marine
Corps), plus a ch airman and a (nonvoting) vice
chairman. a lso military offi cers. who are appointed
by the president and confirmed by the Senate. The
JCS does not have command autho rity over troops,
but it plays a key role in national defense planning.
Since 1986 the chairman of the Joint Chiefs has been
designated the pres ident's principal military adviser.
in an effo rt to give him more influence over the JCS.
Assisting the JCS is the Joint Staff, consisting of
several hundred officers from each of the four services. The staff draws up plans for various military contingencies. Before 1986 each staff member was loya l
to the serv ice whose uniform he or she wore. As a
result the staff was often "joint" in name only, since
few members were willing to take a position opposed
by their serv ice for fear of bein g passed over for promotion. The 1986 law changed this in two ways:
First. it gave the cha irman of the JCS co ntro l over the
Joint Staff; now it works for the cha irman. not for the
JCS as a group. Second, it required the secretary of
defense to establish guidelines to ensure that officers
assigned to the Joint Staff (or to other interservice
bodies) are promoted at the same rate as officers
whose careers are spent entirely with their own
services.

The Services
Each military service is headed by a civilian secretary-one for the army. the navy (including the
Marine Corps). a nd the air force- plus a senior military officer: the chief of staff of the army. the chief of
naval operations. the commandant of the Marine
Corps, and the chief of staff of the air force. The civil ian secretaries are in charge of purchasing. auditing.
congress ional relations, and public affairs. The military chiefs oversee the discipline and training of their
uniformed forces and in addition represent their
services on the Joint Chiefs of Stafr.

The Chain of Command
*The secretary of the navy manages two services. the navy
and the Marine Corps.

Under the Constitution the president is the commander in chief of the armed forces. The chain of

The New Problem of Terrorism
command runs from him to the secretary of defense
(also a civilian), and from him to the various unified
and specified commands. These orders may be transmitted through the JOint Chiefs of Staff or its chairman , but by law the chairman of the JCS does not
have command a uthority over the combat forces.
Civil ians are in charge at the top to protect against
excessive concentration of power.
No one yet knows how well the 1986 changes will
work, though many analysts viewed the quick victory in the 1991 Persian Gulf War as evidence of its
success. Critics of the Pentagon have been urging
changes along these lines at least since 1947. But
others say that unless the armed services are actually merged, interserv ice rivalry will continue. Still
others argue that even the coordination achieved by
the 1986 act is excessive. The country, in their view,
is better served by having wholly autonomous services. What is striking is that so many members of
Congress who once would have insisted on the anticoordination view voted for the 1986 law, thereby
indicating a greater will ingness to permit some
degree of central military lead ership.

The New Problem of
Terrorism
Since 9/11 both our foreign policy and our mi litary
policy have had to focu s on terrorism and what to do
with nations we have conquered that harbored terrorists. When the co ld war was on, this was easy. For
a half century, each president, operating through the
National Security Council , made it clear that our
chief goal was to prevent the Soviet Union from overrunning Western Europe, bombing the United States,
or invading other nations.
But the Soviet Union has disappeared and no
other nation ha s acquired the power to take its place.
During the cold war we lived in a bipolar w orld
made up of two superpowers. Now we live in a
unipolar world made up of the United States as the
only superpower. But our superpower status, though
it means no other country can challenge us militarily, stil l leaves us vulnerable here a nd abroad to terrorist attacks, as 9/11 amply confirms.
To respond, President George W Bush in September 2002 issu ed a document that emphasized a new
view of our policies. Instead of waiting to be attacked,

the president said that America "will act against such
emerging threats before they are ful ly form ed"
because we "cannot defend America a nd our friends
by hoping for the best. " We will identify and destroy a
terrorist threat "before it reaches our borders" and
"we will not hesitate to act alone."49 In the case of
Iraq, this meant a commitment to "regime change";
that is, getting rid of a hostile government, even if the
United Nations did not support us.
This has been called a doctrine of preemption; that
is, of attacking a determined enemy before it can
launch an attack against us or an ally. In fact , it is not
really new. President Bill Clinton launched cruise missile strikes aga inst training camps that followers of
Osama Bin Laden were using in the aftermath of their
bombing of American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 199 8. President Bush elevated the policy of
preemption into a clearly stated natio nal doctrine.
Supporters of this view hailed it as a positive step
to defeat terrorists abroad before they could attack us
at home. Critics attacked the argument as justifying
preemptive and poss ibly unjust wars a nd abandoning the United Nations. This debate has divided Congress in a way that puts an end to the old ada ge that
partisanship ends at the water's edge.
Since the end of the cold war we have not had a
common en emy that, in the opinion of critics of our
overseas efforts, should justify a nonpartisan view.
Most liberal Democrats opposed both our effort to get
Iraq out of Kuwait in 1991 and our invasion of Iraq
in 2003; most Republicans supported both efforts. 50
But when President Clinton launched attacks on
hostile forces in Kosovo, he was supported by many
liberal Democrats and opposed by many conservative
Republicans.5 ] Party differences and political ideology now make a big difference in foreign policy.
Sometimes we have so ught and obtained United
Nations support, as we did when going to war in
Korea (1951 ) and in la unching our effort to force
Iraqi troops out of Kuwait (1991). We did not seek it
in fighting against North Vietnam (in the 1960s), in
occupying Haiti (1994), or in going to the assistance
of friendly forces in Bosnia (1994) or Kosovo (1999) .

bipolar world

A politica l landscape with two

superpowers.

unipolar world
supe rpowe r.

A political landscape w ith one

5 55

American Hostages Be in
Second Year of Captivi~
Families Urge Pres'd
I ent to
Negotiate Freedom

MEMORANDUM

july 13
WASHINGTON
The fa milies of the six A .
CaptIve in the Middle E
mencan hostages held
'd
ast toda . ..
I ent for failing to . I ' YCrItIcIZed the presWIll t Jelr release ...

To: The president
From: National security adviser
Subject: Hostages
The si x Ame ricans held hostage in the Middle East are beginning their
second year of captivity. One, a CIA officer, is undergoing torture . It has been the
policy of this administration not to negotiate with terrorists. Criticism of this refusal
is being heard from hostage families and their sympathizers. The terrorist groups are
demanding that we end our support of Israel. A government in the region has secretly
indicated that, in exchange for military supplies, it may be able to help win the release
of "some" hostages.
Your options:
1. Maintain the "no-negotiations" policy but use qu iet diplomacy with friendly nations
in the region to see whether they can intercede with the terrorist groups on behalf of
the hostages.
Advantages: (a) Our " no-negotiations " policy remains credible, and this will deter
other terrorist groups from th inking that they can win concessions by capturing
Americans. (b) This policy is consistent with our insistence that U.S. allies not negotiate
with terrorists .
Disadvantages: (a) There is no evidence that our traditional policy will get the
hostages released . (b) Public sympathy for the hostages may increase, and this will lead
to more criti cism of this administration for failing to free captive Americans.
2. Secretly exchange arms for the release of Americans .
Advantages: (a) Some or all hostages may be released . (b) We may earn the goodwill of
more moderate elements in the area and thereby increase our influence there.
Disadvantages: (a) We may deliver arms and no hostages will be released. (b) If secret
arms del iveries become public, we will be heavily criticized for abandon ing our "nonegotiations" policy.
3. Use military units to f ind and free the hostages.
Advantage: The hostages may be freed without our having to make any concessions.
Disadvantages: (a) The military is not optimistic that it can find and free the hostages,
who are being kept in hidden, scattered sites. (b) The hostages may be killed during the
rescue effort.
Your decision:
Option 1 _ __

Option 2 _ __

Option 3 _ __

Summary
When we invaded Iraq in 2003, we asked for but did
not get United Nations support; we went anyway,
aided by allies , such as Britain and Australia, that
joined with us.
After we conquered Afghanistan and Iraq we faced
the problem of rebuilding these nations. The United
States has had a lot of experience, some good and
some bad , with this problem. We helped put Germany
and Japan back on their feet after World War II. From
1992 to 1994 we tried to bring peace among warring
factions to Somalia. From 1994 to 1996 we worked to
install a democratically elected president and rebuild
the local police force in the Caribbean country Haiti.
Starting in 1995 we worked with European allies to
restore order to Bosnia and Kosovo, located in what
used to be Yugoslavia. In 2001 we began helping
Afghans create a new government and economy, and
in 2003 we started doing the same thing in Iraq.
We succeeded in Germany and Japan, failed in
Somalia and Haiti, are making progress in Bosnia
and Kosovo, and have just got started in Afghanistan
and Iraq. 52 There are many reasons for our failures,
some beyond our control. But we can learn something from where we are making progress. The lessons are these: Do not leave the country quickly;
rebuilding it takes a long time. Organize your own
agencies so that they can operate together, drawing

*
T

on lessons learned from the past. Make certain that
our civilian and military operations in the country
are carefully coordinated.
It is hard to do these things. Many Americans will
want our troops back home as soon as possible, and
preSidents know this. Our government agencies often
do not work together; rather, they sometimes work as
rivals. The State Department usually has a different
opinion than does the Defense Department and the
Agency for International Development has differences with both of these. Our military forces usually
are made up of fighting units , with relatively few
troops trained as police officers or civilian administrators, and when a U.S. civilian administrator
arrives on the scene, he or she may not work comfortably with the military leaders. These problems
are about what you would expect from knowing how
government bureaucracies operate (see Chapter 15).
The United States does not have any top official.
other than the president himself. who is in charge of
nation building and whose office exists for a long
time so as to learn and apply lessons from the past.
In Afghanistan and Iraq there has been conflict
between the State and Defense Departments with no
referee other than the president. When a new president takes office. the country has to start all over
again.

SUMMARY

he great issues of national diplomacy and military policy are shaped by majoritarian politics.
The president is the dominant figure, political ideology is important, and interest groups are central only
to those issues-such as free trade and the allocation
of military contracts- that engage their interests.
Majority opinion is weakly defined. In general it
approves of the United States playing an international role but in particular cases would like Americans
to stay home and mind their own business. But when
America is caught up in a crisis or the president
sends troops overseas, the co untry and the troops are
strongly supported.
Elite opinion plays a more powerful role, but it is
divided into four worldviews: isolationism, co ntainment, disengagem ent. and human rights. The first is
less common now than once was the case. Propo-

nents of the remaining three would be deeply at odds
if they were confronted today with a decision of
whether we should stay in Vietnam, drive Iraqi
troops out of Kuwait, give aid to Bosnia, or launch an
air campaign in Kosovo.
Foreign and military decision-making is organized to give civilians control. The president is assisted
chiefly by the National Security Council and the secretaries of state and defense. Civilian control of the
military is vested in the president, who issues orders
not through military officers but through the secretary of defense. The Joint Chiefs of Staff is a planning
and advisory body.
When the military budget is developed, it tends to
abide by majoritarian politics. But when it is spent on
the armed services and military contractors, interest
group politics intervenes.

557

558

Chapter 20

Foreign and Military Policy

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?

1. Is American foreign policy set by public wishes
or elite views?
Elite views matter greatly because most Americans
pay little attention to foreign affairs most of the time.
And on many key issues, the public disagrees with
the elite. But when the president sends troops overseas to fight, the public will rally around him.

clear that he has great powers on foreign affairs. The
president has often sent troops to llght without a declaration of war, but Congress has invariably supported him. Technica lly, he should get Congress 's
approva l under the War Powers Act, but if Americans are already fighting it would be very hard for
Congress to say no.

2. If only Congress can declare war, why has the
president become so powerful in military
ai/airs?
The Constitution makes him the commander in chief
of the military, and the Supreme Court has made it
RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. Why do we go to war against some dictatorships
and not others?
Some threaten our interests directly and some do not.
And even when they do not threaten us, as in Bosnia,
Haiti, Kosovo, and Somalia. we may intervene to
protect citizens from brutality. Or we may not, as in
Rwanda . Everything depends on how the government
assesses each situation .

rights coincide. But at other times they do not. This is
a continuing issue that divides American foreign policy elites. In Congress liberal members supported and
conservative ones opposed our intervention in Bosnia
and Kosovo even though neither country threatened
us; in Iraq conservative ones supported and many liberal ones opposed our intervention.

2. Should our foreign policy be based on American
interests or some conception of human rights?
Sometimes this is not a problem because in a few cases
a threat to our interests and a violation of human
WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

US. Army: www.army.mil
US. Air Force: www.af.mil
US. Navy: www.navy.mil

Central Intelligence Agency: www.odci.gov
Department of State: www.state.gov

SUGGESTED READINGS
Alliso n. Gra ha m T. Essellce oj Decisioll : Explaillillg tile Cuball Missile
Crisis. Boston: Little. Brown . 1971. Shows how th e decision
made by a president durin g a maj or cri sis was shaped by
burea ucratic a nd orga nizational factors.
Ba rnett. Th omas E M. Tile Pelltagoll's New Map: War and Peace ill tile
'f'wellt!J-Jiirst Celltur!J . e w York: Berkl ey Books. 2004. Di scusses wh a t America 's foreign and milita ry po licy should be in th e
global war aga in st terror.
Kissin ger. Henry. Wilite House Yellrs. Boston: Little. Brown. ] 979 .
A bril li ant insider's acco unt of th e politics a nd tactics of "high
dipl omacy" durin g the ixo n admini strati on .
Mead. Wa lter Russell. Special Providellce. New York: Knopf. 2001.
Argues that America n fo reign policy. th ough often criticized.
has been remarka bly success ful.

Mu eller. John E. War. Presidellts. alld PlIblic Opillioll. New York:
Wiley. 1973. Best summ a ry of the relati onship between presidential foreign policy decisions a nd public opinion.
Sil verstein. Cord on. l111balallce oj Powers: COllstitlltiollallllterpretatiOIl alld tile Makillg oj A111ericml Jio reigll Policy. New York:
Oxford University Press. 1996. Argues th a t the president ha s
not yielded hi s authority over forei gn po li cy to Congress.
Weiss ma n. Steph en R. A Cultll re of Deji-rellce: COllgress 's Hlilure of
LeaderS/lip ill i'oreigll Policy. New Yo rk: Basic Books. 1995.
Takes a view opposite that of Silverstein: Co ngress defers too
mu ch to th e pres ident in foreign po li cy.

CHAPTER

Environmental Policy

The American Context
Entrepreneurial Politics: Global
Warming
Majoritarian Politics: Pollution from
Automobiles
Interest Group Politics: Acid Rain
Client Politics: Agricultural Pesticides
The Environmental Uncertainties
The Results

21

WHO GOVERNS?

TO WHAT ENDS?

1.

1.

Why have environmental issues
become so important in American
politics and policy-making?
2. Does the public get the environmental laws it wants?

E

2.

If we wish to have cleaner air and
water, how far should we go in making them cleaner when the cost of
each additional gain goes up?
What is the best way for the government to achieve an environmental
goal : by issuing orders or offering
incentives?

verybody loves the environment. A large majority of the American

public believes that the government should do more to protect it. Over
80 percent of college freshmen believe that the government is not doing
enough to control pollution, fa r more than the number who think th e govern ment is doing too little about disarmament. protecting the consumer, or
controlling handgun s.] 0 one wa nts to be caJled a "poll uter." A staff member in the George W. Bush ad ministration briefed the president over two
hundred times. When asked what issue got the most atten tion in Washington, hi s answer was clear: the environment. 2
Why, then, is environmenta l policy so controversial? There are four reasons. First, every governm enta l po li cy, includ ing one esta bli shed to protect
the environment, creates both winners and losers. The losers a re the people
who must pay the costs without gettin g eno ugh of the benefi ts. Sometimes
those losers are infl uentia l interest gro ups. But so metimes the losers are
average citizens. They may love the environment, but not enough to change
the way they live in order to enhance it. For example, a utomobile exhausts
are a major cause of smog, but not many people like the idea of being told
to leave their cars at home and take the bus to work.
Second, many environmental issues are enmeshed in scientific uncerta inty: the experts either do not know or they disagree about what is happening and how to change it. For example, some people worry that society
is burning so much fuel (thus producing a lot of carbon dioxide) and cutting
down so many trees (thus reducing th e plants avail able to convert carbon
dioxide back into oxygen) that the ear th will soon become a green house: the
excess carbon dioxide in the earth 's atmosphere will prevent heat from
esca ping, and so the earth will get warmer, with disastrous effects for
humanity. But scientists do not know how large the greenhou se effect is,
whether it wi ll lea d to a harmful amo unt of global warm ing, or (if it will)
what should be don e abo ut it. 3
Third , much environmenta l policy takes the form of entrepreneurial politics-mobilizing decis ion-makers with strong, often emotional appeals in
order to overcome the politi ca l adva ntages of the client groups that oppose
a change. To make these appea ls, peop le who want chan ge must stir up controversy a nd fi nd vill ains. Many times this produces des irable changes. But
it can a lso lead to di storted priorities. For exa mple. it is mu ch eas ier to ma ke
dramatic and poli tica lly powerfu l arg uments about a pesticide that causes a

560

The Am erican Context
minute increase in the risk of cancer than it is to
dramatize the runoff into our rivers and oceans of
polluted water from farms and city streets.
Finally, env ironmental politics profoundly affect
how the fed era l government deals with states and
with other nations. The states have passed more than
three dozen laws to lower the emission of various
greenhouse gases and have influenced how Washington handles cleaning up toxic waste sites. 4 During
the Clinton administration, the government participated in drafting the 1997 Kyoto Protocol that ca lled
for a 5 percent reduction worldwide in greenhouse
gases, but aware that the Senate was strongly
opposed to this treaty President Clinton never pushed
for its ratification. Senators had noted that the treaty
would allow several co untries, such as China and
India, to keep generating gree nhouse gases but
would require that the United States cut energy
use by 25 percent by 2012. 5 The George W. Bush
administration scrapped the treaty.

The American Context
Environmental policy, like welfare policy, is sh aped
by the unique features of American politics. Almost
every industrialized nation has rules to protect the
environment, but in this country those rules are
designed a nd enforced in a way that would be bafflin g to someone in, say. Sweden or England.
First, environmenta l policy making in the United
States is much more adversarial than it is in most
European n ations. In th is country there have been
bitter and lasting conflicts over the contents of the
Clean Air Act. Minimum a uto emiss ions standards
are uniform across the nation, regardless of local
cond itions (states ca n set higher sta ndards if they
wish). Many rules for improving air and water quality have strict deadlines and require expensive technology. Hundreds of inspectors enforce these rules,
and hundreds of lawyers bring countless lawsuits to
support or cha llenge this enforcement. Government
and business leaders h ave frequently denounced
each other for being unreasonab le or insensitive. So
antagonistic are the interests involved in environmental policy that it took thirteen years, from 1977
to 1990, to agree on a congressional revision of the
Clean Air Act.
In England, by contrast, rules designed to reduce
air pollution were written by government and busi-

ness leaders acting cooperatively. The rules are neither rigid nor nationally uniform; they are fl exible
and allow plenty of exceptions to deal with loca l variations in business needs. Compliance with the rules
depends mostly on voluntary action, not formal
enforcement. Lawsuits are rare. Business a nd government officials do not routinely accuse each other
of being unreasonable. You might think that all this
sweetness and light were the result of having meaningless rules, but not so. As David Vogel h as shown,
the improvement in air and water quality in England
has been at least as great as, if not greater than, that
in the United States. 6
A second feature of environmental policy here is
that. as in so many other policy areas, what is done
depends heavily on the states. Though there are uniform national a ir quality standards, how those standards are achieved is left to the states (subj ect to
certain federal contro ls). Though sewage treatment
plants are in large measure paid for by Washington.
they are designed, built, and operated by state and
loca l governments. Thou gh the federal government
decrees that radioactive waste must be properly disposed of somewhere, the states have a big voice in
where that is. When Congress decided in 1982 to
select places in which to dispose of such waste. it
announced that sites would be chosen on the basis of
"science." But of course no state wanted to get suc h
waste, so all obj ected. In the congressional committee that made the final decision in 1988, Nevada had
the least influence, and so Nevada got the waste. In
a federal system of government, "science" rarely
makes allocative decisions; local politics usually does.
Federalism reinforces adversaria l politics: one of
the reasons environmental issues are so contentious
in this co untry is that cities and states fight over what
standards should app ly where. But federalism is not
the whole story. The separation of powers guarantees that almost anybody who wants to wield influence over environmenta l policy will have an
opportunity to do so. In England and in most European nations, the centralized, parliamentary form of
government means that the opponents of a policy
have less leverage. *

* Here, environmental pressures are brought by interest
groups; in Europe, where such groups have less influence,
environmental ists form or enter politica l parties so as to be
represented in the legislature.

561

Senate Debates
~~dangered Species Law
W~~HrNGTON, D.C.
.

le Senate Committee E .
'
on nVlfonment and Pub
eanngs toda .
lOW, if at all, it should m d'{' In an effort to decide
endangered species. The °h J Y the Jaw that protects
c aIrman saId ...
Il c Works held h

I

MEMORANDUM
To: Senator Diane Gray
From: Michael Jones, legislative assistant
Endangered species have been protected by federal laws since 1973. People now
disagree about the value and effectiveness of these enactments.
Arguments for keeping or strengthening the law:
1. The law has helped preserve some endangered species, such as the condor.
2. It is essential that humans preserve biodiversity, in part because we owe it to nature
and in part because people may derive medical and other benefits from plants that
are now endangered .
3. The earth is losing species at an alarming rate .
Arguments against keeping the present law:
1. Some species, such as the condor or the ocelot, may be worth preserving, but sure ly
not the pocket mouse, snail darter, or pine barren tree frog . There are now over
one thousand species labeled "endangered ."
2. The law does not take into account the harm to farmers, loggers, or home builders
that results from threatening legitimate activities with demands that some species
be protected .
3. The law has generally failed to protect any species.
Your decision:
Favor law _ _ __
Wish to change or abolish law _ _ _

Entrepreneu rial Politics: Global Warming
It would take a book almost as long as this one to
describe all the environmental laws and regu lations
now in effect in this co untry and to di scuss the endless co ntroversies over how those rules should be
changed or expanded. Since 1963 some three dozen
major federal environmental laws were enacted. and,
at the start of the 109th Co ngress in 2005, a half
dozen more were to be proposed.
In this chapter we wa nt to explain how environmental policy is made. Controversies over co ntrolling
pollution from stationa ry so urces, such as fa ctories
and power plants, take the form of entrepreneurial
politics-many people hope to benefit from rules that
impose costs on a few firms. Policies intended to
reduce air pollution caused by automobiles involve
majoritarian politics-many people hope to benefit,
but many people (anyone who owns a car) will have
to pay the cost. The fight over acid rain has largely
been a case of interest group politics- regions hurt
by acid rain (mainly in the ortheast) argue with
regions that produce a lot of acid rain (mainly in the
Midwest) about who should pay. Finally, there are
exa mples of client politics at work- for example,
when farmers manage to minimize federal controls
over the use of pesticides. Most people a re un aware of
what food conta ins what pesticide or which, if any,
are harmful; farmers a re keenly aware of' the econo mi c benefits of pesticides and are well organized to
defend them.

Entrepreneurial Politics:
Global Warming
Entrepreneurial politics created the environmental
movement. When an offshore well spewed thousands
of ga ll ons of oll onto the beaches of Santa Barbara,
California, at the very time Qanuary 1969) when
protest politics was in the air, it became difficult or
impossible for the government or business firms to
resist the demand that threats to our natural surroundings be curtailed. The emerging environmental
movement created an occas ion- Earth Day, first celebrated on April 22, 19 70- to celebrate its beginning.
The movement was hugely successful. In 1970
Pres ident Nixon created the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Co ngress to ughened the existing Clean Air Act and passed the Water Quality
Improvement Act. Two years later it passed laws
designed to clean up the water: three years later it

adopted the En dangered Species Act. New laws were
passed right into the 1990s. Ex isting environmental orga nizations grew in size, a nd new ones were
formed. Pub lic opinion rallied aro und environmental
slogans.
It is a foo lish politician who today opposes environmentalism. And that creates a problem, because
not all environmental iss ues are equally deserv ing of
support. Take the case of global warming.
The phrase means that gases, such as carbon
dioxide, produced by people when they burn fossil
fuels-wood, oil, or coal-get trapped in the atmosphere and cause the earth 's temperature to rise.
When the temperature goes up, bad things may follow- fl oods on coastal areas as the polar ice caps
melt, wilder weather as more storms are created, and
the spread of tropical diseases to Nor th America.
Some politicians say that "all" or "almost all" scientists know that global warming wi ll occur in ways
that hurt humankind.
In fact neither all nor almost all scientists believe
this theory. The scientific community is divided over
the issue. Most scientists agree that the ea rth has gotten a bit warmer over the past century. But from there
on profound disagreements exist. Activist scientists
say that the ea rth is getting warmer; skeptical ones
note that the earth's atmospbere has been getting
cooler. Activists say that fossil-fuel gases are making
the ear th wanner; skeptics rejoin that the earth's temperature regu larly changes from natural causes, such
as changes in the sun's production of heat. Activists
say that the sea will rise because of melting ice caps;
skeptics respond that the ice caps are not melting.
Activists say that their computer models prove that the
earth wi.ll get warmer in the future; skeptics rejoin that
these models can't even explain temperature changes
that have occurred in the past. Activists say that a
warmer earth will be bad for humankind; skeptics say
that a warmer earth wilJ make it easier to grow crops
and feed people. Activists say that we should act now,
despite scientific doubts; skeptics say that we should
learn more before doing anything. 7
As with most kinds of entrepreneurial politics,
global warming has res ulted in a conflict among
eli tes who often base their arguments on ideology
as much as on facts. Environmenta l activists raise
money with scary statements about the harm global
warming will cause; conservatives raise money with
scary statements about the eco nomic pain an American cut in gree nhouse gases will ca use.8 But given
the popularity of "the environment" as an issue, the

563

564

Chapter 21

Environmental Policy

Major Environmental Laws
Smog Clean Air Act (passed in 1970; amended in
1977 and 1990)
· Stationary sources: EPA sets national air
quality standards; states must develop plans to
attain them. If the state plan is inadequate. EPA
sets a federal plan. Local sources that emit more
than a certain amount of pollutants must install
pollution control equipment.
• Gasoline-powered vehicles: Between 1970
and 1990. pollution from cars was cut by
between 60 and 80 percent. Between 1991 and
1998 there was another 30 percent reduction.
All states must have an auto pollution inspection
system.
• Cities: Classifies cities in terms of how severe
their smog problem is and sets deadlines for
meeting federal standards.
Water Clean Water Acts of various years state
that there is to be no discharge of wastewater into

activists dominate the discussion. and politicians can
only with great difficulty criticize their claims.
Another environmental examp le of entrepreneurial politics is the Endangered Species Act. Passed
in 1973. it forbids buying or selling a bird. fish. animal, or plant that the government regards as
"endangered"-that is, likely to become extinct
unless it receives special protection-or engaging in
any economic activity (such as building a dam or
running a farm) that would harm an endangered
species. Currently there are more than six hundred
species on the protected list; about half are plants.
The regulations forbid not only killing a protected
species but also adversely affecting its habitat.
Firms and government agencies that wish to build
a dam. bridge. factory, or farm in an area where an
endangered species lives must comply with federal
regulations. The complaints of such clients about
these regulations are outweighed by the public support for the law. Sometimes the law preserves a creature. such as the bald eagle. that almost everyone
admires; sometimes it protects a creature. such as the
snail darter. that no one has ever heard of.

lakes and streams without a federal permit; to get a
permit. cities and factories must meet federal discharge standards.
Toxic Wastes EPA is to clean up abandoned
dump sites with money raised by a tax on the
chemical and petroleum industries and from general revenues. (Many thousands of such sites
exist.)
Environmental Impact Statements Since
1969. any federal agency planning a project that
would significantly affect the human environment
must prepare in advance an environmental impact
statement (EIS).
Acid Rain The Clean Air Act of 1990 requires a
reduction of 10 million tons of sulfur dioxide
(mostly from electric-generating plants that burn
coal) by 1995. The biggest sources must acquire
government a llowances (wh ich can be traded
among firms) setting emission limits.

Majoritarian Politics:
Pollution from Automobiles
The Clean Air Act of 1970 imposed tough restrictions on the amount of pollutants that cou ld come
out of automobile tail pipes. Indeed . most of the
debate over that bill centered on this issue.
Initially the auto emissions control rules followed
the pattern of entrepreneurial politics: an aroused
public with media support demanded that automobile companies be required to make their cars less
polluting. It seemed to be "the public" against "the
interests," and the public won: by 1975 new cars
would have to produce 90 percent less of two pollutants (hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide), and by
1976 achi eve a 90 percen t reduction in another
(nitrous oxides). This was a ta ll order. There was no
time to redesign automobile engines or to find an
alternative to the internal combustion engine: it
would be necessary to install devices (ca ll ed catalytic
converters) on exhaust pipes that would transform
pollutants into harmless gases.

Mlljoritllrilll1 Po litics: PollutionJrom Automobiles
But a little-noticed provision in the 1970 law soon
shoved the battle over automobile pollution into
the arena of majoritarian politics. That provision
requ ired states to develop land -use and transportation rules to help attain a ir quality standards. What
that mea nt in practice was that in any area where
smog was sti ll a problem, even after emission controls had been placed on new cars, there wou ld have
to be rules restricting the public's use of cars.
There was no way cities such as Denver, Los Angeles. and ew York could get rid of smog just by requiring people to buy less-polluting cars-the increase in
the number of cars or in the number of miles driven
in those places outweighed the gain from making the
average car less poll uting. That meant that the government would have to impose such u npop ul ar measures as bans on downtown parking, mandatory use of
buses and carpools, and even gasoline rationing.
Efforts to do this failed. Popular opposition to such
rules was too great, and the few such rules that were
put into place didn't work. Congress reacted by postponing the dead lines by which air qua li ty standards
in cities wou ld have to be met; the EPA reacted by
abandoning any serious effort to tell people when
and where they could drive. 9
Even the effort to clean up the exhausts of new
cars ran into opposition. Some peop le didn 't like the
higher cost of cars with catalytic converters; others
didn't like the loss in horsepower that these converters caused (many people disconn ected them). The
Un ited Auto Workers unio n began to worry that
antismog rules would hurt the U.S. auto industry
and cost them their jobs. Congress took note of these
complaints a nd decided that despite a lot of effort,
new cars co uld not meet the 90 percent emission
red uction standard by 1975-1976, and so in 1977 it
amended the Clean Air Act to extend these deadlines
by up to six years.
The Clean Air Act, when revised again in 1990. set
new, tougher auto emission control standards-but it
push ed back the deadline for compliance. It reiterated
the need for getting rid of smog in the smoggiest cities
and proposed a number of ways to do it- but it set the
deadline for compliance in the worst area (Los Angeles) at twenty years in the future.
Most clean-air laws passed since 1990 h ave targeted particu lar industries. For example, in 2004 the
Bush administration approved a new measure to dramatica lly reduce emissions from heavy-use diesel
engines used in construction, agricu ltural, and other
industria l machinery. The public will support such

Auto manufacturers have begun to produce hybrid cars,
such as this Toyota Prius, that use both electric and gasoline engines to achieve high Ji-lel economy.

tough environmental laws when somebody else pays or
when the costs are hidden (as in the price of a car); it
will not give as much support when it believes that it is
paying, especial ly when the payment takes the form of
changing how and when it uses the family car. Here are
more examples of each kind of majoritarian politiCS.
• Majoritarian Politics When People Believe the
Costs Are Low The National Environmental Policy
Act (NEPA) , passed in 1969, contained a provision
requiring that an en vironmental impact statem en t
(EIS) be written before any federal agency undertakes
an activity that will "significantly" affect the qua lity of
the human environment. (Simil ar laws have been
passed in many states, affectin g not only what government does but what private developers do.) Because it
required only a "statement" rather than some specific
action and because it was a pro-environment law,
NEPA passed by overwhelming majorities.
As it turned out, the EIS provision was hardly
innocuous. Opponents of virtua lly any governmentsponsored project have used the EIS as a way of
blocking, changing, or delaying the project. Hundreds of lawsuits have been filed to chall enge this or

environmental impact statement

A report
required by federal law that assesses the possible effect of a project on the environment if
the project is subsidi zed in whol e or part by
federal fund s.

565

566

Chapter 21

Environmental Policy

that provision of an EIS or to claim that a project was
not supported by a satisfactory £IS. In this way environmental activists have challenged the Alaska
pipeline. a Florida canal. and several nuclear power
plants. as well as countless dams. bridges. highways.
and office buildings. Usually the agency 's plan is
upheld. but this does not mean that the EIS is unimportant: the EIS induces the agency to think through
what it is doing. and it gives critics a chance to examine. and often to negotiate. the content of those
plans.
Despite the grumbling of many people adversely
affected by fights over an EIS (someone once complained that Moses would never have been able to
part the Red Sea if he had had to file an EIS first) .
popular support for it remains strong because the
public at large does not believe that it is paying a high
price and does believe that it is gaining a significant
benefit.
• Majoritarian Politics When People Believe the
Costs Are High From time to time someone proposes that gasoline taxes be raised sharply. Such taxes
would discourage driving. and this not only would
conserve fuel but also would reduce smog. Almost
everyone would pay, but almost everyone would benefit. However. it is only with great difficulty that
the public can be persuaded to support such taxes.
The reason is that the people pay the tax first. and the
benefit. if any. comes later. Unlike Social Security.
where the taxes we pay now support cash benefits we
get later. gasoline taxes support noncash benefits
(cleaner air. less congestion) that many people doubt
will ever appear or. if they do. will not be meaningful
to them.1°
When gasoline taxes have been raised. it has usually been because the politicians did not push the tax
hike as an environmental measure. [nstead they
promised that in return for paying higher taxes the
public would receive some concrete benefits-more
highways, more buses, or a reduction in the federal
deficit (as happened with the gas tax hike of 1990
and again in 1993).

Interest Group Politics:

Acid Rain
Sometimes the rain, snow. or dust particles that fall
onto the land are acidic. This is ca ll ed acid rain. One

source of that acid precipitation is burning fuel . such
as certain types of coal. that contains a lot of sulfur.
Some of the sulfur (along with nitrogen) will turn
into sulfuric (or nitric) acid as it comes to earth. Steel
mills and electric power plants that burn high-sulfur
coa l are concentrated in the Midwest and Great
Lakes regions of the United States. The prevailing
winds tend to carry those sulfurous fumes eastward,
where some fall to the ground.
That much seems certain. Everything else has
been surrounded by controversy. Many lakes and
rivers in the eastern United States and in Canada
have become more acidic. and some forests in these
areas have died back. Some part of this is the result of
acid rain from industrial smokestacks. but some part
of it is also the result of naturally occurring acids in
the soils and rainfall. How much of the acidification
is man-made and how much is a result of the actions
of Mother Nature is unclear. Some lakes are not
affected by acid rain; some are. Why some are affected more than others is unclear. The long-term effects
of higher acid levels in lakes and forests are also
unclear.
These scientific uncertainties were important
because they provided some support for each side in
a fierce interest group battle. Residents of Canada
and New England complained bitterly of the loss of
forests and the acidification of lakes. blaming it on
midwestern smokestacks. Midwestern businesses.
labor unions. and politicians denied that their
smokestacks were the major cause of the problem (if.
indeed. there was a problem) and argued that. even if
they were the cause. they shouldn't have to pay the
cost of cleaning up the problem.
Here was a classic case of two well-organized parties. one hoping to reap benefits and the other fearing
to pay costs. locked in a struggle over a policy proposal. Even before people were aware that acid rain
might be a problem. these two groups were fighting
over how. if at all. sulfur emissions should be
reduced.
An attempt to deal with the issue in 1977 reflected the kind of bizarre compromises that sometimes
result when politically opposed forces have to be reconciled. There were essentially two alternatives. One
was to require power plants to burn low-sulfur coal.
Th is would undoubtedly cut back on sulfur emissions. but it would cost money. because low-sulfur
coal is mined mostly in the West. hundreds of miles
away from the midwestern coal-burning industries.

Interest Group Politics: Acid Rain
The other way would be to require power plants to
install scrubbers-complicated and very expensive
devices that would take sulfurous fumes out of the
gas before it came out of the smokestack. In addition
to their cost, the trouble with scrubbers was that
they didn't always work and that they generated a lot
of unpleasant sludge that would have to be hauled
away and buried somewhere. Their great advantage,
however, was that they would allow midwestern utilities to continue their practice of using cheap, highsulfur coal.
Congress voted for the scrubbers for all new coalburning plants, even if they burned low-sulfur coal.
In the opinion of most economists, this was the
wrong decision,ll but it had four great political
advantages. First, the jobs of miners in high-sulfur
coal mines would be protected. They had powerful
allies in Congress. Second , environmentalists liked
scrubbers, which they seemed to regard as a definitive, technological "solution" to the problem, an
approach far preferable to relying on incentives to
induce power plants to buy low-sulfur coal. Third,
scrubber manufacturers liked the idea, for obvious
reasons. Finally, some eastern governors liked scrubbers because if all new plants had to have them, it
would be more costly, and thus less likely, for existing
factories in their states to close down and move into
the West.
The 1977 law in effect required scrubbers on all
new coa l-burning plants- even ones located right
next to mines where they could get low-sulfur coal.
As two scholars later described the law, it seemed to
produce "clean coal and dirty air."12
The 1977 bill did not solve much. Many of the
scrubbers, as predicted, didn't work very well. And
there remained the question of what to do about
existing power plants and factories. In the early
1980s the Reagan administration took the position
that too little was known to warrant strong action;
more research was needed Ilrst. The Canadian government and members of Congress from the Northeast took a very different view, demanding that
something be done immediately.
For thirteen years there was a political stalemate
in Congress. as is often the case when strongly
opposed interest groups Ilght it out. And when a
solution was finally agreed upon, it was a compromise. President Bush the elder proposed a two-step
regulation. In the first phase III power plants would
be required to reduce their emission of sulfur by a

Ilxed amount. They could decide for themselves how
to do it: buy low-sulfur coa l, install scrubbers, or use
some other technology. This would be done by 1995.
In the second phase, with a deadline in the year
2000, there would be sharper emission reductions
for many more plants, and this would probably
require the use of scrubbers. To create some flexibility in how much each utility must cut its emissions,
a system of sulfur dioxide allowances that could be
bought and sold was established. Coal miners complained that they would lose jobs during phase one,
and so they were promised some financial compensation if they were laid off as a result of their employers' complying with the new limits. This compromise
became part of the Clean Air Act of 1990. In 2004,
however, a host of new laws were proposed that, if
approved, would force power plants to reduce emissions of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxide, and (new to
the list) mercury by at least 70 percent over the next
Ilfteen years. At the start of the 109th Congress in
2005, interest groups, advocates, and experts on all
sides of the issue were once again poised to battle
each other.
Interest group politics permeates many aspects of
environmental policy making. When cities or states
consider land-use controls and zoning ordinances,
they are weighing the competing demands of established residents (who often want as little new growth
in their communities as possible) against demands of
developers who want to build additional housing.
Interest group politics often lacks the moral fervor
of entrepreneurial politics and rarely taps the deep
streams of public opinion that are reflected in
majoritarian politics. As environmental policy has
become more complex and as people have adjusted
to existing laws, however, new interest groups have
been formed that have a stake in how things are
done. As a result it becomes harder and harder to
change existing policies. The heady victories of the
early 1970s are hard to duplicate today because
groups that were once unorganized are now well
organized.
For example, there is now a large and growing
industry that makes products designed to improve
the environment. As we saw in the acid rain controversy, industry can play an important role in supporting laws that favor their machines, whether or
not they are the best so lution to the problem. Industry is far better organized today than in 1970 to
use its emp loyees and political allies to defend its

567

568

C/1Upter 21

Figure 21.1

Environmental Policy

Government Regulation

QUE S T ION
In general do you think there is too much, too little.
government regulation and involvement in the area of environmental
protection? *

-

Too little

-

Too much

70
60
50
Q)

00

2c

40

Q)

E
30
Q)
0...

20
10

1982

~
1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

J
1988

1989

1998

* Others responded " right amount" or "don't know."
Source: Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report (January 20, 1990): 185,

updated w ith Wirth lin Worldwide Survey.

interests. Similarly, public-interest groups, such as
the Environmental Derense Fund, that did not exist
in 1965 now compete with other environmental
groups ror money and publicity. Labor unions, such
as the United Auto Workers, that once rought ror
tough air pollution laws now are worried about
whether some of these laws may cost them th eir jobs.
Despite the rise of all or these interests, the politica l momentum usually remains with the poli cy
entrepreneurs. Environmentalism is seen as good
politics (see Figure 21.1), and few members of Co ngress want to be caught on the wrong side of the vote
on an environmental bill.

Client Politics: Agricultural
Pesticides
Some cli ent groups have so far escaped this momentum. One such group is organized farmers, who have
more or less successfully resisted efforts to re trict.
sharply. the use of pesticides or to control the runorr
or pesticides from farmlands.
For a while it seemed as though farmers would
also fall berore the assaults of policy entrepreneurs.
When Ra chel Carson published Silent Spring in

1962 . she set orf a public outcry about the harm to
wildlire caused by the indiscrimin ate use or DDT. a
common pesticide. In 1972 the EPA banned the use
of DDT.
That same year Congress directed the EPA to evaluate the safety of all pesticides on the market; unsafe
ones were to be removed. However. that is easier said
than done. On e reason is that th ere are over fifty
thousand pesticides now in use. with five thousand
new ones introduced every year.1 3 Testing all of
these chemica ls is a huge, vastly expensive, and very
time-consuming job. es pecia lly since any health
effects on people may not be observed for several
years. 14 Another reason is that pesticides have many
benefi cial uses: therefore, someone has to balance
the gains and the risks of using a given pesti cide and
compare the relative gains and risks of two similar
pesticides.
But even if th e science were easy. the politics
would not be. American farmers are the most productive in th e world, and most of them beli eve that
they cannot achieve that output (and thus their present incomes) without using pesticides, These rarmers
are well organized to express their interests and well
represented in Congress (especia lly on the Hou se and
Senate Agricultural Committees). Complicating matters is the fact that the subsidies the taxpayers give to
fa rm ers often encourage them to produce more food
than they ca n sell and thus to use more pesticides
than they rea lly need. Though many of these chemica ls do not remain in the crops that are harvested,
large amounts sink into the soil. co nta minating
water supplies. But these problems are largely invisible to the public and are much harder to dramatize
than, say, the discovery of a toxic waste dump like
that at Love Cana l. New York.
Though attacked by environmental organizations, rarm groups have been generally successful at
practicing client politics. The EPA's budget fo r reviewing pesticides has been kept small (the longtime
chairman of the House Appropri a tions Committee.
Jamie Whitten . was a supporter of farmers and a critic of environmentalists).15 Very few pesticides have
been taken off the market. and those that have been
removed have tended to be ones that. because they
were invol ved in some in cident receiving heavy
media coverage (such as the effect of DDT on birds).
easily fell prey to entrepreneurial politics.
One of the reasons client politics ha s been able to
protect the use or pesticides despite a political atmos-

Th e Environmental Uncertainties

Pesticides help grow better crops, but some worry they
may harm the environment.

phere that heavily favors environmenta l sa fety is
that in fact pesticides have trivial effects on long-term
human health problems, such as cancer. The most
scholarly studies of the tendency of pesticides to
ca use cancer suggest that they are "unimportant"
because "there is no convincing evidence" that they
produce cancer.1 6
A similar kind of client politics exists in the timber
industry. Wood product companies and loggers want
access to forests und er the contro l of the u.s. Forest
Service. Though only 13 percent of all cut timber
comes from these forests and two-thirds of the U. S.
forest system is already off-limits to logging, environmenta lists want further restrictions, especially to
prevent clear-cutting (cutting down all the trees in a
given area) and to prevent harvesting trees from the
old-growth forests of Oregon and Washington. But
Co ngress has generally supported the timber industry, ordering the Forest Service to sell harvestin g
rights at below-market prices, in effect subsidizing
the industry. Some activists hope to convert this
client politics into entrepreneurial politics by
demanding that clear-cutting in certain forests be
stopped in order to protect end angered species, such
as the spotted owl.

Environmentalists have used the protection oj an endangered species, such as the spotted owl, as a way oj reducing
timber ha rvests.

The Environmental
Uncertainties
Making environmental policy strikes many people as
easy-identify a problem, raise a fuss, defeat "the
interests, " and enjoy the benefi ts. In fact it is much
harder than that to have a sane environmental policy.
First, what is the problem? Nobody likes smog,
and human waste or oil slicks Ooating off our beaches are obviously bad . But many other problems are
much less clear-cut. Science doesn't know whether
we are experiencing a dangerous level of global
warming or how bad the greenhouse effect is, if it
exists at all. Pesticides that cause cancer in animals
when given in megadoses mayor may not cause cancer in people when absorbed in nominal amounts.
Second. if there is a problem. what goals do we
want to achieve? We want reasonably clean air and
water. of course, but how clean is reasonably clean?
Since the cost of removing from the air the last 10
percent of some pollutants is often greater than the
cost of removing the first 90 percent, how clean is
clean enough? If making air and water cleaner is
costly in terms of jobs. energy, and economic growth .

569

570

Chapte r 21

Environmental Policy

WHO GOVERNS? TO WHAT ENDS?
Superfund: Cleaning Up Toxic Wastes

D

uring the 1970s hazardous waste sites were
discovered all across America . Dangerous
chemicals, many used decades before anybody worried about the environment and in some
cases involving substances no one knew to be toxic,
were found in the soil and near drinking water.
These new investigations understandably alarmed
many people . They and their legislators wanted this
junk cleaned up.
What could be simpler? Find the dangerous stuff
and take it out. In 1980 President Carter signed the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compen sation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) , commonly
known as Superfund . The law did two th ings: First,
it ta xed chemical and petroleum industries and put
the proceeds, along with general ta x revenues, into
a trust fund to pay for cleaning up abandoned hazardous waste sites. Second, the law gave the government the power to sue any person or company
(if they could be found) that had dumped the
waste . In 1986 the law was strengthened when
President Reagan signed a bi ll that gave the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) more
power and increased the size of Superfund to
$8.5 billion .
But a decade later the results were mixed. Superfund and related laws were associated with steep
reductions in levels of toxic chemical releases (few
new hazardous waste sites were created), but only
14 of 1,200 known hazardous waste sites had been
cleaned up. By 2005 there were still more than

2,000 waste sites that had not been treated . What
had gone wrong?
First, finding and suing the responsible parties
was very difficult. These " potentially responsible
parties" included present and past owners of a site,
their insurance companies, and any firm that
deposited waste long before a law had been passed
saying that it was illegal. Some companies had
dumped the junk knowingly, others by accident;
still others had long since gone out of business or
were bankrupt. Finding them and getting them to
pay were slow and difficult processes. As a result a
lot of the Superfund money went to hire lawyers,
not waste removers.
Second, it is complicated and time-consuming to
clean up a site. Some sites had become big industrial
plants or suburban housing developments. The EPA
never had a staff equal to these high demands. There
was a rapid turnover in EPA Superfund managers.
Third, as the environmental lobby got stronger, it
put more and more pressure on the EPA to expand
the list of hazardous sites and raise the standard for
what constituted a cleaned-up site . No one seemed
to be interested in developing a clear list of toppriority sites; instead the whole list just got longer.
Nobody wants to live on a toxic waste site. But
how do you clean it up? Just by hiring more lawyers
to sue more people? The Superfund problem highlights the difficulty of designing an effective strategy and a good administrative system for doing
what almost everyone wants done.

how big a price are we wi lling to pay? When the cost
of gasoline shot up in 1973- 1974. many voters
became much less interested in nonpoll uting ca rs if
the devices that reduced the poll uti on also redu ced
the cars' gas mileage.
Third. how do we want to achieve our goals? Issuing rules and enforcing them in court often seem the

easiest things to do, but they are not always the wisest. That command-and-contr ol strategy assumes
command-and-control strategy

A strategy to
improve air and water quality, involving the setting of detailed pollution st andards and rules.

The Environmental Uncertainties

571

that the rule makers and rule enforcers know how to
achieve the greatest environmenta l gain at the least
cost. In fact no one knows how to do that, because
loca l circumstances, technologica l prob lems, and
economic costs are so complex. Under what circumstances can we use incentives and market prices to get
people voluntarily to clean up the ir act by using their
own imagination?
All of these uncertainties have become part of the
end less political controversies surro undin g the
adm inistration o[ the Environmental Protection
Agency. For example:
• What Is the Problem? The EPA was given the
responsib il ity to administer certain laws governing
air, water, and pesticides (a mong others). But it is
rarely left alone to define these prob lems; any new
environmental scandal leads to popular and congressional demands that it drop everything and solve
that crisis. When toxic chemica ls were found at Love
Canal and Virginia Beach. these dramatic discoveries
put other, less dramatic, but often more important
problems on the back burner.
• What Are the Costs and Benefits? Everyone
wa nts a healthy environment, but people do not distinguish accurately between realistic and unrealistic
threats or between reasonable an d unreasonab le
costs. The biggest scare is cancer, even though every
form of cancer h as been steadily declining for many
years (except lung cancer, which is caused primarily
by smoking, not environmental hazards). People fear
the unknown- many are afraid of flying, [or example, even though flying is vastly safer than driving.
People fear strange threats, such as toxic chemicals,
even though they may never hurt anyone. People
applaud dramatic governmenta l steps without asking whether they actua lly help anyo ne. For exa mple,
the government has mandated that all asbestos must
be removed from publ ic school buildin gs. Though
intense exposure to asbestos can cause hea lth problems, removing all the asbestos fro m old school buildings helps almost no one a nd may hurt the asbestos
removers. The problem for government officials is to
keep policies aimed at real risks- they do exist- and
not to be diverted by popular concerns over unrea l
ones. In a free society, that is not easy.
• What Are Our Goals? When the EPA was to ld by
Congress to eliminate all pollutants entering our

Workers clean lip oil spilled by the Exxon Va ldez after it grounded
on Bligh Heef in Alaska's Prince William Sound in 1989.

waterways by 1985, to cut auto emissions by 90 percent withi n five years, and to eliminate smog in all
cities, Congress should have known that these goals
were utterly unrealistic. When the EPA rea lized that
it could not achieve these goals, it was forced to ask
for extensions in deadlines and for revisions in laws.
This gave it the appearance of knuckling under to
ind ustry pressure.1 7
• How Do We Achieve Our Goals? Initially the
EPA was zealous about using a comma nd-and-contro l strategy to improve air and water quality. For
example, to reduce water pollution discharged from
factories, the EPA issued rules broken down into 642
industry subcategories, and even then there was a lot
of local variation that it cou ld not take into account.
When the cost of doing thi s sort of th ing got out o[
contro l, the EPA during the Carter ad ministration
began to devise incentives to rep lace some rules.
These includ ed offsets, bubbles. and banks:

• Offsets. If a company wants to open a new plant
in an area with polluted a ir, it can do so if the pollution it generates is offset by a reduction in pollution [rom another source in that area. To achieve
that reduction, the new company may buy an
existin g company and close it down.
• Bubble standard. A bubble is the total amount
of air pollu tion that can come from a given factory. A company is [ree to decide which specifi c
sources within that factory must be reduced in
order to meet the bubble standard.

572

Chapter 21

Environmental Policy

. Pollution allowances (or banks). If a company
reduces its polluting emissions by more than the
law requires, it can either use this excess to cover
a future plant expansion or sell it to another company as an offset.

Once, only affected businesses complained about
the "high cost, slow progress, and legal complexity of
environmental regulations. Increasingly, however,
pro-environment interest groups and the government itself have become aware of the difficulties that
arise when the government relies on a commandand-control strategy that is indifferent to costs and
excessively reliant on lawsuits.
When the Clinton administration took office in
199 3, it h ad the strong support of environmentalists. Vice President Gore was a visible and influential
supporter of environmental protection; he had even
written a book on the subject. Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt was also a staunch environmentalist. But instead of just pushing ahead with more
command-and-control policies, the new administration began to reexamine these approaches. It suggested, for example, that the Superfund law, intended
to clean up toxic waste dumps , was in fact not cleaning up many sites; instead, it was encouraging
armies of lawyers to bring lengthy and costly lawsuits to determine who was responsible for the toxic
waste. The administration tried to a mend the law.
but without much su ccess.
American politics, though often messy, confusing,
and conflict-ridden, sometimes changes as people

*
E

learn from their experiences. Indeed, our political
system causes learning (and undergoes change) preCisely because it is messy, confusing, and conflictridden. Problems that once looked simple ("There is
too much pollution") and policies that once sounded straightforward ("We'll tell people to stop polluting") must often be tempered and modified once
they are tested by the complexities of reality.

* The Results
Though Americans think that their environment has
gotten worse, in fact many aspects of it have gotten
better since 19 70 . There is now much less carbon
monoxide, sulfur dioxide, a nd lead in the atmosphere
than once was the case. It is less clear whether there
have been equally noticeable improvements in water
quality, in large part beca use much of the gunk that
rIows into our rivers, lakes, and oceans does not come
from some fixed so urce (such as a sewer) that can be
easily isolated; a lot comes from runoff from the
ground as a result of rain washing pollutants off
urban streets and farmlands and into the water.
Hazardous waste is found at thousa nds of known
locations (and perhaps hundreds more unknown
ones). The cleanup job is so great that it will be years
before much progress can be shown. Getting big
reductions in dangerous pesticides requires first
reaching agreement on what is a dangerous pesticide
and then finding a way of minimizing the harm to
agriculture that would be ca used by the reduction.

SUMMARY

nvironmental issues illustrate all four styles of
poli cy-making.
Entrepreneurial politics: an unorganized public is to
beneJlt at the expense of a well-organized group. An
example is the effort to reduce what some think is
global warming. Such politics requires mobilizing the
media, dramatizing the issue, and convincing members of Congress that their political reputations will
suffer if they do not cast the right vote. To prevent
client groups from taking over the implementation of
these laws, the bills are written to make it easy to use
the courts to force action.

Majoritarian politics: an unorganized public is to benefit at its own expense. Exa mples include reducing
auto emissions by imposing transportation controls,
raising gasoline taxes, and requiring environmental
impact statements. Interest groups tend not to be the
decisive players. Whether the proposal wins or loses
depends on how the public generally evaluates the
costs. They like environmental impact statements
but oppose higher gasoline taxes and restrictions on
private automobile use. Dramatizing a crisis tends to
be less effective because the public at large, and not
some small interest, must pay for any benefits.

Summary

Interest group politics: two organized groups with a
material stake in the outcome fight over who will pay and
who will benefit. An exa mple is the co ntrolling of acid
rain. When fa ced with two or more powerful interests, Con gress tends not to pass broad, sweeping bills
but to find workable compromises.
Client politics: an organized group gets a benefit; an
unorganized public must pay. Exa mples include the use
of agricultural pesticides and timber cutting in U.S.
forests. Clie nt politics depends on the client group's
having strategically placed a llies in Congress and o n
its potential opponents' being unab le to convert this
poli cy system into a pattern of entreprene urial politics (by dramatizing a crisis, for exam pl e).

In general, entrepreneurial politics has played the
dominant role in most environmenta l issues. The
preva lence of entrepreneurial politics in this arena is
largely due to (1) the su ccess of policy entrepren eurs in
sensitizing public opinion to these ma tters and (2) the
growth of a variety o[ public-interest lobbies with close
ties to the med ia and with the ability to threaten recalcitrant legislators with attacks on their reputations.
Unlike economic or welfare issues, environmental
issues lend themselves to entrepreneuria l politics
because the problems can be portrayed in life-threatening terms, the goals can be related to what most people
believe is the good life, and the costs can be minimized ,
deferred , or (seemingly) placed on small groups.

RECONSIDERING WHO GOVERNS?

1. Why have enviromnental issues become so important in American politics ami /Jolicy-maldl1g?

2. Does the public get the enviromnental laws it
wants?

Today a lmost everybody loves the environme nt and
thinks government ha s a duty to protect and improve
it. Despite post-19 70 improvements in m a ny environmenta l conditions, most people think the environment is getting worse, not better, and worry
about acute environmenta l threats to public health
and sa fety. Many env ironmenta l issues, including such major concerns as globa l warning, are
e nmes hed in scientific uncerta inty. Nevertheless,
env ironmental iss ues have attracted t he interest and
energy of talented policy entrepreneurs. These issues
figure prominently not only in Washington politics.
but a lso at the state and local levels as well as in
internationa l relations.

Yes a nd no. Most people say that they want the government to do whatever it takes to protect and
improve the environment, and most support laws and
regulations that force particular industries to reduce
pollu tion or take other pro-enviro nm ent actions at
their own expense. Many such laws an d regulations
have been ena cted and enforced since the ea rl y
1970s. But most people waver when it comes to laws
and regulations that would impose substa ntial financial costs on them (substantially higher gasoline
taxes, for example) or force them to change how they
live (prohibiting them [rom driving their ca rs to work,
[or instance). Typically, politicia ns echo the public's
pro-environment sentiments without, however,
enacting policies or enforcing regulations that impose
large and visible costs on most people.

RECONSIDERING TO WHAT ENDS?

1. II we wish to have cleaner air and water, how Iar
sho uld we go in making them cleaner when the
cost oI each additional gain goes up?
Not as far as some people would like. We have cut the
pollutants coming out of cars dra matically, but it will
cost a lot to cut them to zero. The key question is
whether spending scarce dollars that way makes more
sense than spending the sa me amount of money on
something else, like preventing diseases or funding
schools. Choosing between spending money on clean
air, less disease, and better schools may strilce some
readers as wrongheaded: shouldn't we have all of

these? But governing means u sing limi ted resources to
dea l w ith many different desires. It is a lmost impossible to have air that is entirely clea n (natural fires and
dust storms wi llmalce it dirty) , and even reducing auto
pollutants to zero will have to await the invention of
engines powered by things like fuel cell s that have as a
waste product only water. If we spend huge sums on
making air or water entirely pure, we will inevitably be
spending less on something else that we also want.
America ns love the environment, but even for things
we love we have to worry about costs.

573

574

Chapter 21

Env ironmenta l Policy

2. What is the best way for the govemmCl1t to
achieve an environmental goal: by issuing
orders or offering incentives?
For a lot of people, issu ing orders makes sense. That
way we tell people what they h ave to do and can punish them if they don't do it. But for most economists
and policy analysts, incentives make more sense
because they give people the opportunity to choose
the most efficient way to help the environ ment. For
example, we can tell utilities not to let a ny sulphur

dioxide out of their smokestacks. but that may
impose huge costs on utilities that already produce
very little su lphur dioxide or even drive them out of
business. If instead we tell utilities they will get
rewards for reducing pollutants, those that can do so
easily will make big changes and . if they reduce them
by more than a specified amount, will be allowed to
sell the extra gains to another company to help it
meet its goals. Still, when the gains are huge and the
costs minimal, issuing orders makes sense.

WORLD WIDE WEB RESOURCES

Env ironmental Protection Agency: www.epa.gov
Environmental activists
Environmenta l Defense: www.edf.org
Natural Resources Defense Cou ncil:
www.nrdc.org
Sierra Club: www.sierraclub.org

Environmental skeptics
American Enterprise Institute: www.aei.org
Competitive Enterprise Institute: www.cei.org
Oregon Institute: www.oism.org/project/

SUGGESTED READINGS
Easterbrook. Gregg. A Moment on Earth. New York: Vikin g. 1995.
A comprehensive account of what we have accomplished and
what remain s to be don e rega rdin g t he environme nt. written
by a hard- headed env ironmenta li st.
Gore. AI. Earth ;n the Balance. Bosto n: Hou gh ton Mifflin . 2000.
Rev ised ed ition of a pro-environment a rgument I1rst written
when Gore was a senator.
La ndy. Mark K .. Marc j. Roberts. and Stephen R. Thomas. The Environmental Protection Agency: Askinrl the Wrong Questions. ew
York: Oxford Univers ity Press. 1990. Careful review of how the
EPA tries to man age complex environmental problems under
laws and poliCies that force it to focus on ;;what ca uses cancer,"
Lomborg. Bj0rn. The Skeptical Environmentalist. Cambridge: Cambrid ge University Press. 2001. A sch olarly criticism. written by
a libera l. of cl a im s about grow in g harm to the environment.

Mendelsohn. Robert. The Greening oj Global Warm ing. Washin gton.
D. C.: American Enterprise In stitute. 1999 . A critiqu e of globa l
warming th eories.
Rosenbaum . Walter A. Environmental Politics and Polic!}. 4th ed.
Was hin gton. D.C.: Co n gress ion a l Quarterly Press. 1998.
Ana lysis of the politics of environmental issues. including air
and water pollution. the use of chemi ca ls. nuclear power. and
preserving outer space.
Vogel. David . National St!lle oj HegL/latioll: Environ/1/ental Polic!I in
Great Britain and the United States. Ith aca. N.Y.: Corn ell University Press. 1986. An explanati on of why env ironme nta l poli tics in th e United States is so adversarial.

Justice is the end ofgovernment. It is the
end of civil s ciety. It ever has been ana
ever will be pursued until it be obtained,
or untilliber be lost in the pursuit.
FEDERALIST

No. 51

CHAPTER

Who Governs?
To What Ends?

Restraints on the Growth of
Government
Relaxing the Restraints
The Old System
The New System
Consequences of Activist Government
The Influence of Structure
The Influence of Ideas

22

A

s we stated at the start of this book, there are two questions about politics: Who governs? To what ends? This concluding chapter constitutes
our best contemporary answer to these two most enduring questions as
they relate to American politics, past and present. You can begin to answer
them yourself. Just ask almost any contemporary American about how to
fix a social or economic problem, and he or she will start talking about what
the president and Congress sho uld do. People worry about crime, abortion,
drug abuse, civil rights, campaign finance , sexual status , gun control,
school quality, the environment, and the homeless, and they debate one
another about what policy Washington should have on these matters. We
are all quite used to this. But until a half century ago, such chatter would
have been nonsense.

*

Restraints on the Growth of Government

When Dwight Eisenhower was president, none of these iss ues except civil
rights was even thought to be a matter for federal policy, and on civil rights
Congress didn 't do very much. Our national politica l agenda was very
short. During the Eisenhower administration we decided to build an interstate highway system, admit Alaska and Hawaii into the union, and fight
over the power of labor unions. For eight years these were about the only
major domestic political issues. The rest of the time Washington worried
about foreign affairs.
This was about what the Founders had expected, though many of them
would have objected to some things that were done in the Eisenhower
administration. Some would have thought Washington shouldn't build any
highways because the Constitution did not authorize Congress to make laws
about such matters. The federal government, in their view, should limit itself
to war, peace, interstate commerce, establishing a national currency, and
delivering the mail. And for a long time, the prevailing interpretation of the
Constitution sharply limited what policies the federal government co uld
adopt. The Supreme Co urt restricted the authority of the government to regulate business and prevented it from levying an income tax. Most important,
the Supreme Court refused, with some exceptions, to allow the delegation of
broad discretionary power to administrative agencies.
The Supreme Court could not have maintained this position for as long as
it did if it had acted in the teeth of popular opposition. But popular opinion

577

Chapter 22

578

Who Governs? To What Ends?

was also against the growth of government. It was
not thought legitimate for the federal government to
intervene deeply in the economy (even the America n
Federation of Labor, led by Samuel Compers, resisted
federal involvement in labor-management issues). It
was certainly not thought proper for Washington to
upset racial segregation as it was practiced in both the
North and the South . It took constitutional amendments to persuade Congress that it had the authority
to levy an income tax or to prohibit the sale of alcoholi c beverages. Even in the 19 30s public opinion polls
showed that as many as half the voters were skeptical
of a federal unemployment compensation program.
That was the Old System. Today, under the New
System, federa l politics is not about some small list of
problems thought to be truly national; it is about
practically everything. It is a lm ost impossible to
think of a problem about which Wash ington has no
policy at all or aro und which it does not carryon
intense debates. Listen to radio talk shows and they
will be about why Washin gton ha s a good or bad policy about almost every iss ue you ca n imagine.
What is puzzling about thi s change from the Old
System to the New System is that the Co nstitution is
filled with arrangements des igned to make it hard ,
not easy, for the federal government to act. The separation of powers permits the president, Co ngress,
a nd the courts to check one another; federa lism
guarantees that states will have an important ro le
to play; and the division of legislative a uthority
betwee n the House and the Senate ens ures that each
body will be inclined to block the other. To get a new
law passed, you h ave to please a large number of
politica l actors; to get a new one blocked, you only
have to convince one co ngress ional committee.
That system made the nationa l government relatively unimporta nt for many decades. Until well into
the twentieth century, governors a nd mayors were
more importa nt than the president. Most members of
Co ngress did not serve more than one or two terms in
Washington; there didn' t seem to be much point in
becoming a career legislator because Congress didn't
do much , didn' t pay much , and wasn't in session for
very long.

*

Relaxing the Restraints

As we have said, the constraints on federal action
have now weakened or disappeared altogether. First,

the co urts have altered their interpretatio n of the
Constitution in ways that have not only permitted
but sometimes even required government action.
The Bill of Rights has been extended so that almost
a ll its important provisions are now regarded as
applying to the states (by having been incorporated
into the due process clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment) . This means that a citizen ca n use the
federa l courts to alter state policy to a greater degree
than ever before. (Overturning state laws that ban
abortions or require racially separate schools are two
important exa mples of this change.) The special protection that the co urts once gra nted property rights
has been substa nti a lly reduced so that business can
be reg ul ated to a greater deg ree than previously. The
Co urt has permitted Congress to give broad discretionary powers to administrative agencies , allowing
burea ucrats to ma ke dec isions that once only Congress could make.
Second, public opinion has changed in ways that
support an expanded role fo r the federal government. The public demanded action to dea l with the
Great Depression (the programs that resulted, such
as Social Security, survived in par t beca use the
Supreme Court changed its mind about the permiss ibl e scope of federal action). Political elites changed
the ir minds faster than the average citizen. Welleduca ted, politically active people bega n demanding
federa l poli cies regarding civi l rights. public welfare,
environmental protection , consumer safety, and foreign a id well before the average citizen became co ncern ed with such things.
Once in pl ace, most of these programs proved popular, so their co ntinuance was supported by mass as
well as elite opinion. The cumul ative effect of this
process was to blur, if not erase altogether, the line that
once defined what the government had the authority
to do. At one time a new proposal was debated in terms
of whether it was legitimate for the fed eral government
to do it all. Federal aid to educa tion, for example, was
usually opposed because many people feared it wou ld
lead to federal control of loca l schools. But after so
many programs (including federa l aid to education)
had been passed, people stopped arg uin g about
whether a certain policy was legitimate and argued
in stead about whether it was eJIective.
Third, political resources have beco me more widely distributed. The number and variety of interest
groups have increased enormously. The fund s ava ilabl e from foundations for organizations pursuing

The Old System
specific causes have grown. It is now easier to get
access to the federal courts than formerly was the
case. and once in the courts the plaintiffs are more
likely to encounter judges who believe that the law
and the Constitution should be interpreted broadly to
permit particular goals (for example. prison reform) to
be attained by legal rather than legislative means.
Hundreds of magazines. newsletters. and World Wide
Web pages have arisen to provide policy information
to specialized segments of opinion. The techniques of
mass protest. linked to the desire of television to show
visually interesting accounts of social conflict. have
been perfected in ways that convey the beliefs of a few
into the living rooms of millions.
Campaign-finance laws and court rulings have
given legal status and constitutional protection to
thousands of political-action committees (PACs) that
raise and spend tens of millions of dollars from millions of small contributors. College education. once
the privilege of a tiny minority. has become the common experience of millions of people. so that the
effects of college- in encouraging political participation and in shaping political beliefs (usually in a liberal direction)-are now widely shared. The ability of
candidates to win nomination for office no longer
depends on their ability to curry favor with a few
powerful bosses; it now reflects their skill at raising
money. mobilizing friends and activists. cultivating a
media image. and winning a primary election.
So great have been the changes in the politics of
policy-making in this country starting in the 1930s
that we can refer. with only slight exaggeration. to
one policy-making system having been replaced by
another (see box on page 580).

1-

The Old System

The Old System had a small agenda. Though people
voted at a high rate and often took part in torchlight
parades and other mass political events. political
leadership was professionalized in the sense that the
leadership circle was small. access to it was difficult.
and the activists in social movements were generally
kept out. Only a few major issues were under discussion at any time. A member of Congress had a small
staff (if any at all). dealt with his or her colleagues on
a personal basis. deferred to the prestige of House
and Senate leaders. and tended to become part of

A woman i.nspects drug-warni.ng labels that federal law
requires be placed 011 products.

some stable coalition (the farm bloc. the labor bloc.
the southern bloc) that persisted across many issues.
When someone proposed adding a new issue to
the public agenda. a major debate often arose over
whether it was legitimate for the federal government
to take action at all on the matter. A dominant theme
in this debate was the importance of "states' rights. "
Except in wartime. or during a very brief period
when the nation expressed interest in acquiring
colonies. the focus of policy debate was on domestic
affairs. Members of Congress saw these domestic
issues largely in terms of their effect on local constituencies. The presidency was small and somewhat
personal; there was only a rudimentary White House
staff. The president would cultivate the press. but
there was a clear understanding that what he said in
a press conference was never to be quoted directly.

579

580

Chapter 22

Who Governs? To What Ends?

How American Politics Has Changed
Old System

New System

Congress
Chairmen relatively strong
Small staffs
Few subcommittees

Chairmen relatively weak
Large staffs
Many subcommittees

Interest Groups
A few large blocs (farmers,
business, labor)
Rely on "insider" lobbying

Many diverse interests that form
ad hoc coalitions
Mobilize grassroots

Presidency
Small staff
Reaches public via press conferences

Large staff
Reaches public via radio and
television

Courts
Allow government to exercise few
economic powers
Take narrow view of individual
freedoms

Allow government to exercise
broad economic power
Take broad view of individual
freedoms

Political Parties
Dominated by state and local
party leaders meeting in conventions

Dominated by activists chosen
in primaries and caucuses

Policy Agenda
Brief

Long

Key Question
Should the federal government
enter a new policy area?

How can we fix and pay for an
existing policy?

Key Issu e
Would a new federal program
abridge states' rights ?

For the government to take bold action under this
system, the nation usually had to be facing a crisis.
War presented such crisis, and so the federa l government during the Civil War and World Wars I and II
acquired extraordinary powers to conscript soldiers,
control industrial produ ction, regulate the flow of
information to citizens, and restrict the scope of personal liberty. Each succeeding crisis left the government bureaucracy somewhat larger than it had been
before, but when the crisis ended, the exercise of
extraordinary powers end ed. Once again, the agenda
of political issues became small , and leg islators
argued about whether it was legitimate for the government to enter some new policy area, such as civil
rights or industrial regulation.

Would a new federal program prove
popular?

The New System
The New System began in the 19 30s but did not take
its present form until the 1970s. It is characterized
by a large policy agenda, the end of the debate over
the legitimacy of government action (except in the
area of First Amendment freedoms), the diffusion
and decentralization of power in Congress, and the
multiplication of interest groups. The government
has grown so large that it has a policy on almost
every conceivable subject, and so the debate in
Washington is less often about whether it is right and
prudent to take some bold new step and more often
about how the government can best cope with the

The New System
strains and problems th at arise from implementing
existing policies. As someone once said, the federal
government is now more concerned with managing
than with ruling.
For example, in 1935 Congress debated whether
the nation should have a Social Security system at all;
in the 19 80s it debated whether the system could best
be kept solvent by raising taxes or by cutting beneflts;
in 2004 and 2005 it debated whether some part of
each person's Social Security payments could be
invested in the stock ma rket. In the 1960s Congress
argued over whether there should be any federal civil
rights laws at all; by the 1980sand 1990s it was arguing over whether those laws should be ad ministered in
a way that simply eliminated legal barriers to equal
opportunity for racial minorities or in a way (by affIrmative action) that made up for the disadvantages
that burdened such minorities in the past. As late as
the 1950s the president and Congress argued over
whether it was right to adopt a new program if it
meant that the government had to borrow money to
pay for it. As late as the 1960s many members of Congress believed the federal government had no business
paying for the health care of its citizens; today hardly
anyone argues against hav ing Medicare but many
worry about how best to control its rising cost.
The differences between the Old and New Systems
shou ld not be exaggerated. The Constitution still
makes it easier for Congress to block the proposals of
the president, or for some committee of Cong ress to
defeat the preferences of the majority of Congress,
than in almost any other democratic government.
The system of checks and balances operates as
before. The essential differences between the Old and
the New Systems are these:
1. Under the Old System, the checks an d balances
made it difficult for the federal government to
start a new program, and so the government
remained relatively small. Under the New System, these checks and bala nces made it h ard to
change what the government is already doing, and
so the government remains large.
2. Under the Old System, power was somewhat centralized in the hands of party and congress ional
leaders. There was still pl enty of conflict, but the
number of people who had to agree before something could be done was not large. Under the New
System, power is much more decentralized, and so
it is harder to resolve confli ct because so many
more people- party activists, interest group lead-

581

Federal rules since the mid-1960s have regulated how workers in
fa ctories should lJe protected.

ers, individual members of Congress, heads of
government agencies- must agree.
The transition from the Old to the New System
occurred chiefly during two periods in American
politics. The flrst was in the early 1930s when a catastrophic depression led the government to explore
new ways of helping the needy, regulating business,
and preventing a recurrence of the disaster. Franklin
Roosevelt's New Deal was the result. The hu ge majorities enjoyed by the Democrats in Congress, co upled
with popular demands to solve the problem, led to a
vast outpouring of new legislation and the creation of
dozens of new government agencies. Though initially
the Supreme Court struck down some of these measures as unconstitutional, a key member of the Court
changed his mind and oth ers retired from the bench ;
by the late 1930s the Court h ad virtually ceased
opposing any economic legislation.
The second period was in the mid-19 60s, a time of
prosperity. There was no crisis akin to the Great
Depression or World War II, but two events helped
change the face of American politics. One was an
intellectual and popular ferment that we now refer to
as the spirit of "the sixties"- a militant civil rights
movement, student activism on college campuses
aimed at reSisting the Vietnam War, growing concern abo ut threats to the env ironment, the popular
appeal of Ralph Nader and his consumer-protection

582

Chapter 22

Who Governs? To What Ends?

movement, and an optimism among many political
and intellectual leaders that the government could
solve whatever problems it was willing to address. The
other was the 1964 election that returned Lyndon
Johnson to the presidency with a larger share of the
popular vote than any other president in modern
times. Johnson swept into office and with him, liberal
Democratic majorities in both the House and Senate.
The combination of organized demands for new
policies. elite optimism about the likely success of
those policies, and extraordinary majorities in Congress meant that President Johnson was able, for a
few years, to get almost any program he wanted
enacted into law. So large were his majorities in Congress that the conservative coalition of Republicans
and southern Democrats was no longer large enough
to block action; northern Democratic liberals were
sufficiently numerous in the House and Senate to take
control of both bodies. And so, much of Johnson's
"Great Society" legislation became law. This included
the passage of Medicare (to help pay the medical bills
of retired people) and Medicaid (to help pay the medical bills of people on welfare) , greatly expanded federal aid to the states (to assist them in fighting crime,
rebuilding slums, and running transit systems), the
enactment of major civil rights laws and of a program to provide federal aid to local schools, the creation of a "War on Poverty" that included various
job-training and community-action agencies, and the
enactment of a variety of laws regulating business for
the purpose of reducing auto fatalities , improving the
safety and health of industrial workers, cutting back
on pollutants entering the atmosphere, and safeguarding consumers from harmful products.
These two periods-the early 1930s and the mid1960s-changed the political landscape in America.
Of the two, the latter was perhaps the more important, for not only did it witness the passage of so
much unprecedented legislation, but also it saw
major changes in the pattern of political leadership.
It was during this time that the great majority of the
members of the House of Representatives came to
enjoy relatively secure seats, the primary elections
came to supplant party conventions as the decisive
means of selecting presidential candidates, interest
groups increased greatly in number, and television
began to play an important role in shaping the political agenda and perhaps influencing the kinds of
candidates that are nominated.

Consequences of Activist
Government
One way of describing the New System is to ca ll it an
"activist" government. It is tempting to make a sweeping judgment about such a government, either praising it because it serves a variety of popular needs or
condemning it because it is a bureaucratic affliction.
Such generalizations are not entirely empty, but neither are they very helpful. The worth of any given
program, or of any collection of programs, can be
assessed only by a careful consideration of its costs
and benefits, of its effects and side effects. But we may
discover some general political consequences of the
en larged scope of government activity.
First. as the government gets bigger. its members must spend more time managing the consequences- intended and unintended- of existing
programs and less time debating at length new ideas.
As a result, all parts of the government. not just the
executive agencies. become more bureaucratized.
The White House Office and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) grow in size and influence.
as do the staffs of Congress. At the same time, private
organizations (corporations. unions, universities)
that deal with the government must also become
more bureaucratic. The government hires more people when it is running eighty programs concerned
with employment than when it is running two. By
the same token, a private employer will hire (and give
power to) more people when it is complying with
eighty sets of regulations than when it is complying
with two.
Second. the more government does. the more it
wi ll appear to be acting in incons istent, uncoordinated, and cumbersome ways. When people complain of
red tape, bureaucracy, stalemates, and confusion,
they often assume that these irritants are caused by
incompetent or self-seeking public officials. There is
incompetence and self-interest in government just as
in every other part of society, but these character
traits are not the chief cause of the problem. As citizens, we want many different and often conflicting
things. The result is the rise of competing policies.
the division of labor among separate administrative
agencies, the diffusion of accountability and contro l,
and the multiplication of paperwork. And because
Americans are especially energetic about asserting

Divided Commission
Proposes Plan to Privatize
SOCJal Security
October 31

MEMORANDUM
To: Fred D. Roster; deputy assistant to
the president
From: Helen Smith, director; White House
Communications Office
Subject: Social Security Commission
Report

WASHINGTON DC
Yesterday a n~ti~n~l
'.
the U.S. Congress to stu~Ommlsslon established by
tem released a report st . y the SocIal Security sysall scheduled retiree b:tl~g that the system can pay
recommending that the sne Its only until 2018, and
as to permit workers to ~~~em be reformed now so
usmg part of their Social Se abhsh pnvate accounts
recommendation h
cunty payrolJ taxes. That
half of the comm;ssi~;~ver, was rejected by nearly
the system was actuaria~/nembers, who claimed that
y sound until 2042 ...

The president needs to release a public statement on the commission's
majority recommendation to create private accounts. Most media attention so far has
focused on the report's widely divergent estimates of when the system will become
insolvent and the proposal to "privatize" it. Commission members who voted against
the proposal are charging that it represents an attempt to "roll back" or "kill" the
widely popular program . Commission members who voted for it are insisting that it is
vital to "saving" the system.
Arguments for:
1. Private accounts invested in the stock market will likely yield equal or greater
benefits than the present system does.
2. Many reform alternatives involve raising Social Security payroll taxes on all, or
raising the wage cap on the tax for Social Security from its present level ($90,000).
Neither tax increase proposal is popular at present .
3. Creating government-regulated private accounts while preserving this New-Deal-era
program seems popular with young workers.
Arguments against:
1. The yield on private accounts might not be adequate, and even if it is, if young
workers put Social Security payroll taxes into private accounts, government must
make up the difference (estimated at as much as $2 trillion during a decade-long
transition) to pay present program beneficiaries.
2. Raising the Social Security wage cap on only high earners (the top 5 or 10 percent)
could be popular with most voters.
3. Most senior citizens oppose any effort to "privatize" the system, and powerful
advocacy organizations are already lobbying leaders of both parties in Congress and
running ads against the proposal.
Your decision:
1. Advise president to endorse the proposal _ __ _
2. Advise president to reject the proposal _ __
3. Advise president to call for new study _ _ __

584

Chapter 22

Who Governs? To What Ends?

their rights, we must add to the above list of problems
the regu lar use of the courts to cha llenge policies
that we do not like.
Third , an activist government is less susceptible
to control by electoral activity than a passive one.
When the people in Washingto n did little, elections
made a larger difference in po licy than when they
began to do a lot. We h ave po inted out in this book
the extent to which both politica l parties a nd voter
turnout have declined. There are many reasons for
thi s. but an importan t one is often forgotten . If elections make less of a difference-because the few people for whom one votes can do little to alter the
ongo ing programs of governmen t-th en it may
make sense for people to spend less time on party or
electora l activities a nd more on interest group activities aimed at spec ific agencies and programs.
The rapid increase in the number and va riety of
in terest groups a nd their enl arged ro le in government are not patholog ica l. They are a ra tional
response to the fact that elected officials can tend to
only a few things. a nd therefore we must direct our
energies at th e appointed officials (and judges) who
tend to all other government matters. Every president tries to accomplish more, usually by trying to
reorganize the executive branch. But no pres id ent
a nd no reorganization plan can affect more tha n a
tiny fraction of the millions of federal employees a nd
thousands of government programs. "Coordination "
from the top can at best occur selectively. for a few
issues of exceptional importance.
Ronald Reagan learned this when he took office in
1981 after promising to reduce the size of government. He did persuade Congress to cut taxes, but hi s
plans to cut domestic spending resulted in only small
declines in some programs and actu al increases in
many others. Though some programs. such as public
housing, were hard hit. most were not, and agricultural subsidies increased dra matically.
When George W. Bush became president in 2001,
his philosophy was summarized by the phrase "compassionate co nservatism," words that implied that,
though he was a conservative, he was not much
interested in simply cutting the size of the federal
government. And while in ofllce. he proposed programs that would increase spending on many programs. His actions suggest a fact: cutting down on
what Washington does is virtua lly imposs ibl e
because the people want so much of what it does.
Finally, the more government tries to do, the more
things it will be held responsible for and the greater

the risk of failure. From time to time in the nineteenth century. the business cycle made many people
unhappy with the federal government- recall the
rise of various protest parties- though then the government did very little. If federal offi cials were lucky,
popular support would rise as soon as eco nomic conditions improved. If they were unlucky and a depression lasted into the election campaign, they would be
thrown out of office. Today, however. the government- and the president in particul ar- is held
responsible for crime, drug abuse, abortion. civil
rights, the environment, the elderly, the status of
women. the decay of central cities, the price of gasoline, and international tensions in half a dozen
pl aces on the globe.
No government and no president can do well on
a ll or even most of these matters most of the time.
Indeed, most of these problems. such as crime. may
be tota lly beyo nd the reach of the federal government. no matter what its poli cy. It should not be
surprising, therefore. that opinion surveys taken
since the early 1960s have shown a steep decline in
public confidence in government. There is no reason
to believe that this represents a loss of faith in our
form of government or even in the design of its institutions. but it clearly reflects a di sa ppointment
in , a nd even cynicism about. the performa nce of
government.
Disenchantment with government performance is
not unique to the United States; it appears to be a feature of almost every political system in which public
opinion is accurately measured. The disenchantment
is in fact probably greater elsewhere. Americans who
complain of high taxes might feel somewhat differently if they lived in Sweden, where taxes are nearly
twice as high as here. Those who grouse about
bureaucrats in this country probably have never
dealt with the massive. centra lized burea ucracies of
Italy or France. People who are an noyed by congestion , pollution, and inllation ought to a rrange a trip
to Rome. Mexico City, or To kyo. However frustrating
private life and public affa irs may be in this country,
every year thousands living in other nations become
immigrants to this country. Few America ns choose
to emi grate to other places.
The enormous expansion of the scope a nd goals of
the federal government h as not been ra ndom or
unguided. The government has tended to enlarge its
powers more in some directions than in others; certain
kinds of goals have been served more freq uently than
others. Though many factors shape this process of

The Inf1uence of Ideas
selection, two are of special importance. One is our
constitutional structure, the other our political culture.

The Influence of Structure
To see the inf1uence of structure, it is necessary to
perform a mental experiment. Suppose that the
Founders had adopted a centralized , parliamentary
regime instead of a decentralized , congressional one.
They had the British model right before their eyes.
Every other European democracy adopted it. What
difference would it have made had we followed the
British example?
No one can be certain, of course, because the
United States and Great Britain differ in many ways,
and not just in their political forms. At best our mental experiment will be an educated guess. But the following possibilities seem plausible.
A parliamentary regime of the British sort centralizes power in the hands of an elected prime minister
with a disciplined partisan majority in the legislature
and frees him or her from most of the constraints created by independent congressional committees or
independent. activist courts. Had the Framers adopted a parliamentary system, we might see these features in the political life of the United States today:

• Quicker adoption oj majoritarian policies, such as
those in the area oj social welJare. Broad popular
desires would be translated sooner into national
policy when they are highly salient and conform
to the views of party leaders.
• More centralization oj bureaucratic authority- more
national planning, less local autonomy. More decisions would be made bureaucratically, both
because bureaucracies would be proportionately
larger and because they would have wider discretionary authority delegated to them. (If the prime
minister heads both the executive branch and the
legislature, he or she sees no reason why decisions
cannot be made as easily in one place as the
other.) Local authorities would not have been able
to prevent groups of citizens (such as African
Americans) from voting or otherwise participating in public life by maintaining segregated facilities at the local level.
• Fewer opportunities Jor citizens to challenge or block
government policies oj which they disapprove. Without independent and activist courts, without local

centers (state and city) of autonomous power, US.
citizens would have less of a chance to organize to
stop a highway or an urban-renewal project, for
example, and hence fewer citizen organizations
with these and similar purposes would exist.
• Greater executive control oj government. If a situation like Watergate occurred, we would never
know about it. No legislative investigating committees would be sufficiently independent of executive
control to be able to investigate claims of executive
wrongdoing.
• Similar foreign policy. We probably would have
fought in about the same number of wars and
under pretty much the same circumstances.
• Higher and more centralized taxation. Taxes would
be higher, and a larger share of our tax money
would be collected at the national level. Thus we
would find it harder to wage a "tax revolt" (since it
is easier to block local spending decisions than
national ones).
If this list of guesses is even approximately correct, it means that you would get more of some
things that you want and less of others. In general it
would have been easier for temporary majorities to
govern and harder for individuals and groups to protect their interests.
The Founders would probably not be surprised at
this list of differences. Though they could not have
foreseen all the events and issues that would have led
to these outcomes, they would have understood
them, because they thought that they were creating
a system designed to keep central power weak and to
enhance local and citizen power. They would have
been amazed. of course, at the extent to which central power has been enhanced and local power weakened in the United States, but if they visited Europe,
they would learn that by comparison American politics remains far more sensitive to local concerns than
does politics abroad.

-..t.

The Influence of Ideas

The broadly shared political culture of Americans
has also influenced the policies adopted by the U.S.
government. Paramount among these attitudes is
the preoccupation with rights. More than the citizens of perhaps any other nation, Americans define
their relations with one another and with political

585

586

Chapter 22

Who Governs? To What Ends?

A policy dilemma: Nuclear power plants reduce OW" dependence on foreign and nonrenewable energy sources hut
sharpen our concerns over safety.

authority in terms of rights. The civil liberties protected by the Bill of Rights have been assiduously
defended and their interpretation significantly
broadened even while the power of government has
been growing.
For example, we expect that the groups affected by
any government program will have a right to playa
role in shaping and administering that program. In
consequence interest groups have proliferated. We
think that citizens should have the right to select the
nominees of political parties as well as to choose
between the parties; hence primary elections have
largely replaced party conventions in selecting candidates. Individual members of Congress assert their
rights , and thusthe power of congressional leaders
and committee chairmen has stead ily diminished.
We probably use the courts more frequently than the

citizens of any other nation to make or change public policy: in doing so, we are asserting one set of
rights against a competing set. The procedural rules
that set forth how government is to act- the Freedom of Information Act. the Privacy Act, the Administrative Procedure Act- are more comp lex and
demanding than the rules under which any other
democratic government must operate. Each rule
exists because it embodies what somebody has
claimed to be a right: the right to know information,
to maintain one's privacy, to participate in making
decisions , and to bring suit against rival parties.
The more vigorously we assert our rights, the
harder it is to make government decisions or to manage large institutions. We recognize this when we
grumble about red tape and bureaucratic confusion,
but we rarely give much support to proposals to centralize authority or simplify decision-making. We
seem to accept whatever it costs in efficiency or effectiveness in order to maintain the capacity for asserting our rights.
We do not always agree on which rights are most
important, however. In addition to the influence of
the widely shared commitment to rights generally,
government is also shaped by the views that certain
political el ites have about wh ich rights ought to be
given the highest priority. Elite opinion tends to favor
freedom of expression over freedom to manage or
dispose of property. Mass opinion, though it has
changed a good deal in the last few decades, is less
committed to the preferred position of freedom of expression. Rank-and-Ille citizens often complain that
what the elite calls essential liberty should instead
be regarded as excessive permissiveness. People who
own or manage property often lament the extent to
which the rights governing its use have declined.
The changes in the relative security of personal
and property freedom are linked to a fundamental
and enduring tension in American thought.
Tocqueville said it best: Americans, he wrote, "are
far more ardently and tenaciously attached to equality than to freedom." Though democratic communities have a "natural taste for freedom ," that freedom
is hard to preserve, because its excesses are immed iate and obvious and its advantages are remote and
uncertain. The advantages of equality, on the other
hand , are readily apparent, and its costs are obscure
and deferred.] For example, Americans believe in free
speech, but most of us rarely take advantage of that
right and notice the problem only when somebody

The Inj1uence of Ideas

The "Rules"

587

of Politics

Some "Rules" of Politics
Here are some generalizations about American politics, distilled from what has been said in this book,
and offered in nervous awareness that our political
system has a way of proving everybody wrong .
(Before the 1960s it was a "rule" of politics that no
Catholic could be elected president. John F. Kennedy
took care of that.)
• Policies, once adopted, tend to persist whatever
their value. (It is easier to start new programs than
to end old ones.)
• Almost all electoral politics is local politics. (Members of Congress who forget "home base" tend
not to remain in Congress for long.)

N
Not only do interest groups promote government policies,
such policies stimulate interest groups. The National Rifle
Association had little interest in federal regulations until
gun control became a big issue.

says something we don't like. We have to remind ourselves that freedom has to be protected even when it
does not help us directly. By contrast, we notice
equality immediately, as when everybody of a certain
age gets Socia l Security even when they are already
rich. Equa li ty makes us feel comfortable even if a few
people don't need the benefits they are getting.
Tocquevi ll e may have underestimated the extent
to which political liberties would endure, becau se he
did not foresee the determination of the courts to
res ist, in the long run if not the short, the passions of
temporary majorities seeking to curtail such liberties. But he did not underestimate the extent to
which in the economic and social realms Americans
would decide that improving the conditions of life
wou ld justify restrictions on the r ight to dispose of
proper ty and to manage private institutions. At fir st
the conflict was between liberty and eq uality of opportunity; more recently it has become a conflictamong political elites if not within the citizenry

• Whatever the size of their staff and budget, Congress and the White House will always be overworked. (More resources produce more work,
which requires more resources .)
• Each branch of government tends to emulate the
others. (Congress will become more bureaucratized
to cope with an executive branch that becomes
more bureaucratized; judges will become more
activist as Congress becomes more activist.)
• Proposals that seem to confer widespread and
immediate benefits will be enacted whatever their
long-term costs.
• Proposals that seem to confer delayed benefits
will be enacted only if their costs are unknown,
concealed, or deferred .
• Nobody-business people, bureaucrats, members
of Congress, judges, professors-likes competition, and everybody will do whatever he or she
can to reduce or eliminate it.
• "Planning" in government takes place after a crisis takes place.
• The mass media never cover a story about things
that are going well. Thus the number of "problems" in society is a function of the number of
reporters.
• If you want something, you are claiming a right; if
your opponent wants something, he or she is protecting a vested interest.

588

Chapter 22

Who Governs? To What Ends?

itself-between equality of opportunity and equality
of results.
The fact that decisions can be influenced by opinions about rights indicates that decisions can be
influenced by opinions generally. As the political system has become more fragmented and more individualized as a result of our collective assertion of
rights. it has come more under the sway of ideas.
When political parties were strong and congressionalleadership was centralized (as in the latter part of
the nineteenth and the early part of the twentieth
centuries). gaining access to the decision-making
process in Washington was difficult, and the number
of new ideas that stood a chance of adoption was
small. However. those proposals that could command leadership support were more easily adopted:
though there were powerful organizations that could
say no, those same organizations could also say yes.
Today these and other institutions are fragmented
and in disarray. Individual members of Congress
are far more important than congressional leaders.
Political parties no longer control nominations for
office. The media have given candidates direct access
to the voters; campaign finance laws have restricted ,
but not eliminated, the influence that interest groups
can wield by spending money. Form ing new, issueoriented lobbying groups is much easier today than
formerly, thanks to the capability of computers and
direct-mail advertising.
These idea-based changes in institutions affect
how policy is made. When there is widespread
enthusiasm for an idea- especially among political
elites but also in the public at large-new programs
can be formulated and adopted with great speed.
This happened when Lyndon johnson's Great Society
legislation was proposed, when the environmental
and consumer protection laws first arrived on the
public agenda. and when campaign finance reform
was proposed in the wake of Watergate. So long as

such symbo ls have a powerful appeal, so long as a
consensus persists, change is possible. But when
these ideas lose their appeal- or are challenged by
new ideas-the competing pressures make change
extremely difficult. Environmentalism today is challenged by concerns about creating jobs and economic growth; social legislation is challenged by
skepticism about its effectiveness and concern over
its cost; campaign finance reforms are, to some critics, merely devices for protecting incumbents.
This may all seem obvious to a reader raised in the
world of contemporary politics. But it is different in
degree if not in kind from the way in which politics
was once carried out. In the 1920s. the 1930s, the
1940s, and even the 1950s, people described politics
as a process of bargaining among organized interests, or "blocs. " representing business, farming,
labor. ethnic. and professional groups. With the
expansion of the scope of government policy, there
are no longer a few major blocs that sit astride the
policy process. Instead thousands of highly specialized interests and constituencies seek above all to
protect whatever benefits, intangible as well as tangible, they get from government.
We have a large government- and large expectations about what it can achieve. But the government
finds it increasingly difficult to satisfy those expectations. The public's acceptance of an activist role for
government has been accompanied by a decline in
public conl1dence in those who manage that government. We expect more and more from government
but are less and less certain that we will get it, or get
it in a form and at a cost that we find acceptable. This
perhaps constitutes the greatest challenge to statesmanship in the years ahead: to find a way to serve
the true interests of the people while restoring and
retaining their confidence in the legitimacy of government itself.

*

THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
In Congress, July 4, 1776

The Unanimous Declaration of the Thirteen United States of America

hen, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people
to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another,
and to assume, among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal
station to which the laws of nature and of nature 's God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes
which impel them to the separation.
We hold these truths to be self-evident: That all men are created equal; that they
are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are
life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that, to secure these rights, governments
are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed; that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends, it
is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new government,
laying its foundation on such principles, and organizing its power in such form, as
to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, wi ll dictate that governments long established should not be changed for light
and transient causes; and accordingly all experience hath shown that mankind are
more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of abuses
and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design to reduce
them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such
government, and to provide new guards for their future security. Such has been the
patient sufferance of these colonies; and such is now the necessity which constrains
them to alter their former systems of government. The history of the present King
of Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over these states. To prove this,
let facts be submitted to a candid world.
He has refused to assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the
public good.
He has forbidden his governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing importance, unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be obtained; and,
when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.
He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of
people, unless those people would re li nquish the right of representation in the legislature, a right inestimable to them, and formidable to tyrants only.

W

Al

A2

Appendix

He has ca lled together legislative bod ies at places unusual, uncomfortable, and
distant from the depository or their public records , ror the sale purpose or ratiguing
them into compliance with his meas ures.
He has dissolved representative houses repeatedly. for opposing, with manly
fLrmn ess. his invasions on the rights of the people.
He has refused for a long time. after such dissolutions, to cause others to be
elected; whereby the legislative powers, incapable or annihilation. have returned to
the people at large for their exercise; the state remaining, in the mean time. exposed
to all dangers of invasions from without a nd convulsions within.
He has endeavored to prevent the population of these states; for that purpose obstructing the laws for naturalization of foreigners; refusing to pass others to encourage their migration hither, and raising the conditions or new appropriations of lands.
He h as obstructed the administration or justice. by refusing his assent to laws
for establishing judiciary powers.
He has made judges dependent on his will alone, for the tenure of their offices.
and the amount and payment of their salaries.
He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of officers to
harass our people, and eat out their substance.
He has kept among us , in times of peace. standing armies, without the consent
of our legislatures.
He has affected to render the military independent of. and superior to, the civil
power.
He has combined with others to subj ect us to a jurisdiction foreign to our co nstitution, a nd unacknowledged by our laws, giving his assent to their acts of pretended legislation:
For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:
For protecting them, by a mock trial, from punishment for any murders which
they should commit on the inhabitants of these states;
For cutting off our trade with all parts of the world:
For imposing taxes on us without our consent;
For depriving us, in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury;
For transporting us beyond seas, to be tried for pretended offenses;
For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighboring province, establishing therein an arbitrary government, and enlarging its boundaries, so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule
into these colonies;
For taking away our charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and altering
fundamenta lly the forms of our governments;
For suspending our own legislatures. and declaring themselves invested with
power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.
He has abd icated government here, by declaring us out of his protection and
waging war against us.
He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burned our towns, and destroyed the lives of our people.
He is at this time transporting large a rmies of foreign mercenaries to complete
the works of death , deso lation, a nd tyranny already begun with circumstances of
cruelty and perfidy scarcely para lleled in the most barbarous ages, a nd totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.

The Declaration of Independence

A3

He has constrained our fellow-citizens, taken captive on the high seas, to bear
arms aga inst their country. to become the executioners of their friends and
brethren, or to fall themselves by their hands.
He has excited domestic insurrection among us, and has endeavored to bring on
the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless Indian savages, whose known rule of
warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes, and cond itions.
In every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in the most
humble terms; our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated injury.
A prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a tyrant. is
unfit to be the ruler of a free people.
or have we been wanting in our attentions to our British brethren. We have
warned them, from time to time, of attempts by their Legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances of
our emigration and settlement here. We have appea led to their native justice and
magnanimity; and we have conjured them, by the ties of our common kindred, to
disavow these usurpations. which would inevitably interrupt our connections and
correspondence. They, too. have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity which denounces our separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, enemies in war, in peace
friends.
We. therefore. the representatives of the United States of America, in Genera l
Congress assemb led. appea ling to the Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude
of our intentions, do, in the name and by the authority of the good people of these
co lonies. solemn ly publish and declare, that these United Colon ies are, and of right
ought to be, FREE AND INDEPENDENT STATES; that they are absolved from all allegiance to the British crown, and that all political connection between them and the
state of Great Britain is. and ought to be, totally dissolved; and that. as free and independent states. they have full power to levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish commerce, and do all other acts and things which independent
states may of right do. And for the support of this declaration, with a firm reliance
on the protection of Divine Providence. we mutually pledge to each other our lives,
our fortunes. and our sacred honor.
JOH N HANCOCK [President]
[and fifty-five others]

* THE CONSTITUTION
Pr ea mbl e

OF THE UNITED STATES

We the People of tile Un ited States, in Order to form a more perfect Un ion, establish Justice,
insure dom estic Tranquility, provide for the common defence, promote the general WelJare,
and secure tile Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish
this Constitution for the United States of America.
ARTICLE 1.

Bicam e r a l Co n gress

Section 1. All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of
th e United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.

Mc mb e r s hip or th c HOLi se

Section 2. The House of Representatives shall be composed of Members chosen
every second Year by the People of the several States, and the Electors in each State
shall have the Qualifications requisite for Electors of the most numerous Branch of
the State Legislature.
No person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained to the age of
twenty five Years, and been seven Years a Citizen of the United States, and who shall
not, when elected, be an Inhabitant of that State in which he shall be chosen.
Representatives and direct Taxes shall be apportioned among the several States wh ich
may be included within til is Union, according to their respective Numbers, which shall be
determined by adding to the whole Number of free Persons, including those bound to
Service for a Term of Years, and excluding Indians not taxed, three flJt/IS of all otiler
Persons. 1 The actua l Enumeration shall be made within three Years after the first
Meeting of the Congress of the United States, and within every subsequent Term of
ten Years, in such Manner as they sha ll by Law direct. The Number of Representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty Thousand , but each State shall have
at Least one Representative; and until such enumeration shall be made, the State of
ew Hampshire shall be entitled to chuse three, Massachusetts eight, Rhode-Island
and Providence Plantations one, Connecticut five, ew-York six, New Jersey four,
Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia ten. North Carolina five,
South Carolina five, and Georgia three.
When vacancies happen in th e Representation from any State, the Executive
Authority thereof shall issue Writs of Election to fill such Vacancies.
The House of Representatives shall chuse their Speaker a nd other Officers; and
shall have the sole Power of Impeachment.

Power to imp e a c h

Memb e r s hip o r t.he Se nate

Section 3. The Senate of the United States sha ll be composed of two Senators
from each State. chosen by tile Legislature thereoJ,2 for six Years; and each Senator
shall have one Vote.

NOTE: Th e topi ca l head in gs arc not part of the ori gina l Constitution. Excluding the Prea mble a nd Closin g. those porLi on s set in italic type ha ve been superseded or chan ged

I . Chan ged by th e Fourteenth Amendment. secti on 2 .

2 . Ch an ged by the Seve nteen th Amendment.

A4

by later amendments.

The Constitution of the United States

AS

Immediately after they shall be assembled in Consequence of the first Election,
they sha ll be divided as equa lly as may be into three Classes. The Seats of the
Senators of the first class shall be vacated at the Expiration of the second Year, of
the second Class at the Expiration of the fourth Year, and of the third Class at the
Expiration of the sixth Year, so that one third may be chosen every second Year; and

if Vacancies happen by Resignation, or otherwise, during the Recess of the Legislature of
any State, the Executive thereof may make temporary Appointments until the next
Meeting oj the Legis/ature, which shall then fill such Vacancies.3

Power t o t.r y
imp eac hm e nt s

No Person shall be a Senator who shall not have attai ned to the Age of thirty
Years, and been nine Years a Citizen of the United States, and who sha ll not, when
elected, be an Inhabitant of that State for which he sha ll be chosen.
The Vice President of the United States sha ll be President of the Senate, but
shall have no Vote, unless they be equally divided.
The Senate shall chuse their other Officers, and a lso a President pro tempore, in
the Absence of the Vice President, or when he shall exercise the Office of President
of the United States.
The Senate shall have the so le Power to try all Impeachments. When sitting for
that Purpose, they sha ll be on Oath or Affirmation. When the President of the
United States is tried the Chief Justice sha ll preside: And no Person shall be convicted without the Concurrence of two thirds of the Members present.
Judgment in Cases of Impeachment shall not extend further than to removal
from Office, and disqualification to bold and enjoy any Office of bonor. Trust or
Profit under the United States: but the Party convicted shall nevertheless be liable
and subject to Indi ctment. Tria l, Judgment and Punishment, accord in g to Law.

Law s gove rning elect ion s

Section 4. The Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and
Representatives, sha ll be prescribed in each State by the Legislature thereof: but the
Congress may at any time by Law make or alter such Regulations. except as to the
Places of chusing Senators.
The Congress sha ll assemble at least once in every Year, and such Meeting shall
be on thefirst Monday in Decembel; unless they shall by Law appoint a different Day. 4

Ru les of Con g ress

Section 5.

Each House sha ll be the Judge of the Elections, Returns and
Qualifications of its own Members. and a Majority of each shall constitute a
Quorum to dQ Business; but a sma ll er number may adjourn from day to day, and
may be authorized to compel the Attendance of absent Members, in such Manner,
and under such Penalties as each HOLlse may provide.
Each House may determine the Rules of its Proceedings , punish its Members for
disorderly Behaviour, and, w ith the Concurrence of two thirds, expel a Member.
Each House shall keep a JOLlrnal of its Proceedings. and from time to time publish the same, excepting such Parts as may in their Judgment require Secrecy; and
the Yeas and ays of the Members of either House on any question shall , at the
Desire of one fifth of those Present, be entered on the Journal.

3. Cha n ged by the Seve nteenth Ame ndment.
4 . Cha nged by the Twe ntieth Ame ndme nt. section 2 .

A6

Appendix

Neither Ho use. during the Session of Congress. sha ll. without th e Co nsent of
the other. adj ourn for more than three days . nor to a ny other P lace tha n that in
which the two Houses shall be sittin g.
Sa la ri es a nd
imm u ni ti es of me mb e r s

Ba r o n me mb e rs o f Congress
h o ldin g fede ra l app o intive
o ffi ce

Mo n ey bills o ri g in a te in
Ho u se

Pro cedure fo r e n a cti n g
law s : ve to powe r

Powe r s o f Co n g ress
- taxes

- /J o rrow ill g
- regu /ati oll

of eO llllll eree

- lI at ll rali za ti oll all d ba ll krup tey

Section 6. The Senato rs a nd Represen tatives shall receive a Compensation for
their Serv ices. to be ascertained by Law. a nd paid out of the Treasury of the United
States. They sha ll in a ll Cases. except Treason. Felony and Breach of the Peace. be
priv ileged from Arrest durin g their Attendance at the Session of their respective
Houses. a nd in going to a nd returnin g from the same; a nd for any Speech or Debate
in either House. they sha ll not be qu esti oned in a ny other Place.
No Senator or Representa tive shall. during the Time for which he was elected. be
appointed to any civ il Office under the Authority of th e United States. which sha ll
have been created. or the Emoluments whereof sha ll h ave been encreased during
such time; a nd no Person holding a ny Office under the United States. shall be a
Member of either House during his Co ntinu a nce in Office.
Section 7. All Bills for raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives; but th e Senate may propose or concur with Amendments as on other Bills.
Every Bill whi ch sha ll have passed the Ho use of Representa tives a nd the Senate.
sha ll. befo re it become a Law. be presen ted to the Presid en t of the United States; If
he approve he sha ll sign it. but if not he shall return it. with Obj ections to that
House in which it sha ll have originated. who sh all enter the Obj ections at large on
their Journa l. a nd proceed to reconsider it. If after such Reco nsideration two thirds
of tha t Ho use shall agree to pass the Bill. it shall be sent. togeth er with th e
Obj ections. to the oth er House. by which it shall likewise be reconsidered. and if approved by two third s of that House. it sha ll become a Law. But in all such Cases the
Votes of both Houses shall be determin ed by yeas and ays . and the a mes of the
Persons voting for a nd aga in st the Bill sha ll be entered on the Journa l of each
House respectively. If any Bill sha ll not be returned by the President within ten Days
(Sundays excepted) a fter it sha ll have been presented to him. the Same shall be a
Law. in like Manner. as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their
Adjournment prevent its Return. in whi ch Case it sha ll not be a Law.
Every Order. Resolution. or Vote to which the Concurrence of the Senate a nd
House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a qu estion of Adj ournment)
sha ll be presented to the President of th e United States; a nd before the Same shall
take Effect. shall be approved by him . or bein g disapp roved by him. sha ll be repassed
by two thirds of the Senate and House of Representa tives. acco rdin g to the Rules
a nd Limitations prescribed in the Case of a Bill.
Section 8. The Congress shall have Power To lay a nd Collect Taxes. Duties.
Imposts a nd Excises. to pay the Debts and provide for the common Defence a nd general Welfare of the United States; bu t a ll Duties. Imposts a nd Excises sha ll be uniform throughout the Uni ted States.
To borrow Money on the credit of the United States;
To regul a te Co mmerce with foreign Nations. and among the severa l States. a nd
with the Indi an Tribes;
To establish a n uniform Rule of Natura lization . and uniform Laws on the subject of Ba nkruptcies throughout
., the United States;

Th e Constitution oj the United States
- II/ ol/ ey
- co l/l/terJeitil/{J
- post ojJice
- pat ents ami co pyrigh ts

- crente COll rts

- pil I/ is" pira cies
- decfare war
- creat e anl/Y and l/a V!1

- call ti,e lII ilitia

- goverl/ Di stri ct oj
Columliia

- "I/ ecess ar!l-al/d-proper" cla use

Re st ri c tio n s o n power s o r
Co n gr ess

- slave tra de
- ll(IiJeas corp us
- I/ O !J ill oj aUail/der or
ex post Ja cto la w
- I/ O il/t erstat e tarijfs
-

preJere l/ tia l treatmellt Jar
SOll1 e states

11 0

A7

To co in Money, regulate the Value thereof, a nd of foreign Coin, and fix the
Sta nd ard of Weights and Measures;
To provide for the Puni shment of co unterfeiting the Securi ties a nd curren t Coin
of' the United States;
To establish Post Offices and post Roads;
To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited
Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and
Discoveries;
To constitute Tribuna ls inferior to the Supreme Court;
To defin e and punish Piracies and Felonies committed on th e high Seas, a nd
Offences against the Law of ations;
To declare War, gran t Letters of Marque a nd Reprisa l, a nd make Rules concerning Captures on Land a nd Water;
To ra ise a nd support Armies, but no Appropri ation of Mo ney to that Use shall be
for a lon ger Term tha n two Yea rs:
To prov ide and ma intain a Na vy;
To make Rules for the Government and Regulation of the land a nd naval Forces;
To provide for ca lling forth the Militi a to execute the Laws of the Union , suppress Insurrections a nd repel Invas ions;
To provide for organizing. arming, and disciplinin g. the Militi a, a nd for governing such Part of them as may be employed in the Service of the United States. reservin g to th e States respectively, the Appointment of the Officers, a nd the
Authority of tra ining the Militi a according to the discipline prescribed by Co ngress;
To exercise exclusive Legislation in a ll Cases whatsoever, over such District (not
exceeding ten Mil es squa re) as may, by Cession of Particul ar States, a nd the
Acceptance of Congress, become the Seat of the Government of the Uni ted States,
a nd to exercise like Authority over a ll Places purchased by the Consent of the
Leg islature of the State in which th e Same sha ll be, for the Erection of Forts,
Magazines. Arsenals, dock-Ya rds a nd other needful Buildings;- And
To m ake all Laws which sha ll be necessary and proper for carrying into
Execution the foregoing Powers, a nd all other Powers vested by this Co nstitution in
th e Government of the United States. or in any Depar tment or Officer thereof.

Section 9. The Migration or Importation of such Perso ns as a ny of the States
now existing shall think proper to admit, sha ll not be pro hibited by the Congress
pr ior to th e Year one thousand eight hundred a nd eight, but a Tax or duty m ay be
imposed on such Importation, not exceeding ten dolla rs for each Person.
The P rivilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus sha ll not be suspended, unless when
in Cases of Rebellion or Invas ion the public Safety may require it.
No bill of Atta inder or ex post fa cto Law shall be passed.
No Capitation . or other direct, Tax sha ll be laid , unless in Proportion to the CensLls
or Enumeration izerein before directed to be taken. 5
No Tax or Du ty shall be la id on Articles exported from a ny State.
o Preference shall be given by a ny Regulation of Commerce or Revenue to the
Po rts of one State over those of another; nor sha ll Vessels bound to, or from, one
Sta te, be obliged to enter, clear or pay Duties in another.

5. Cha nged by the Sixteenth Amendment.

AS

Appendix

- appropriatiolls

- 11 0 titl es

of

Res tri ctions

1I0lii li ty

0 11

powe r s of st a tes

o Money shall be drawn from the Treas ury, but in Consequence of Appropriations made by Law: and a regular Statement and Account of the Receipts and
Expenditures of all public Money shall be published from time to time.
o Title of Nobility shall be granted by the United States: And no Person holding any Office of Profit or Trust under them, shall , without the Consent of the
Congress. accept of any presen t. Emolument. Office, or Title, of any kind whatever.
from any King, Prince, or foreign State.

Section 10.
0 State shall enter into any Treaty, Alli ance, or Confederation;
grant Letters of Marque and Reprisa l; coin Money: emit Bi lls of Credit; make any
Thing but gold and sil ver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts; pass any Bill of
Atta inder, ex post fa cto Law, or Law impairing the Obligation of Contracts, or grant
any Title of No bility.
No State shalL without the Consent of Congress. lay any Imposts or Duties on
Imports or Exports, except what may be absolutely necessa ry for executing its inspection Laws; and the net Produce of a ll Duties and Imposts. laid by any State on
Imports or Exports. shall be for the Use of the Treasury of the United States: and all
such Laws shall be subj ect to the Rev ision a nd Controul of th e Co ngress.
No State shall. without th e Consent of Congress. lay any Duty of Tonnage, keep
Troops. or Ships of War in time of Pea ce. enter into any Agreement or Compact
with another State, or with a foreign Power. or engage in War, unless actually invaded. or in such imminent Danger as wi ll not admit of delay.

ARTICLE II.
Offi ce o f pres id e nt

Elec ti o n of pres id e nt

Section 1. The executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United States
of America. He shall hold his Offi ce during the Term of four Years, and , together
with the Vice President. chosen for the same Term. be elected. as foll ows:
Each State shall appoint. in such Manner as the Legislature thereo f may direct.
a Number of Elector s. equal to the whole umber of Senators and Representatives
to which the State m ay be entitled in the Congress: but no Senator or Representative. or Person holding an Offi ce of Trust or Profit under the United States.
sha ll be appointed an Elector.

Th e Electors shall meet in their respective States. and vote by BallotIor two Persons, oI
whom one at least shall not be an InhabitnJlt oI the same State with themselves. And they
shall make a List oI all the Persons voted IOI; and oI the Number oI Votes Ior each; which
List they shall sign and certiJy, and transmit sealed to the Seat oj the Government oj the
United States, directed to the President oj the Senate. The President oj the Senate shall. in
the Presence oj the Senate and HOllse of Representatives, open all the Certificates, and the
Votes slwll then be counted. Th e Persoll having the greatest Number oI Votes shall be the
President, iI such Number be a Majority oI the whole Number of Electors appointed; and
iJ there be more than one who have such Ma jority, and have an equal Number of Votes,
then the House of Representatives shall ill1mediately c/1LIse by Ballot one of them Jor
President; and iJ no Person have a Majority, then Irom the five highest on the List said
House shall in like Manner c/wse the President. But in ciwsing the President, the Votes
shall be takell by States, the Representation Ji'om each State having one Vote; a quorumIor
this Purpose shall consist oI a Member or Members Irom two thirds oI the States, and a
Majority of all the States shall be necessary to a Choice. In every Case, aJter the Choice of

The Constitution oj the United States

Req u i remen ts to be
pre s id e n t

Pay of pres id e nt

Powers or pres id e n t
- col/l/I/al/der iI/ chi ef

- pardol/s
- treati es alld
appoilltl/lw ts

Re la ti o n s o r pres id e nt w ith
Co n gre ss

A9

the President, the Person having the greatest Number of Votes of the BIectors shall be the
Vice President. But if there should remain two or more who have equal Votes, the Senate
shall cJwseji"om them by Ballot the Vice President. (,
The Congress may determine the Time of chusin g the Electors, and the Day on
which they shall give their Votes, which Day shall be the same throughout the
United States.
No Person except a natural born Citizen, or a Citizen of the United States, at the
time of the Adoption of this Constituti on, shall be eligible to the Office of President;
neither shall any person be eligibl e to that Office who shall not have attained to the
Age of thirty five Years, and been fourteen Years a Resident within the United
States.
In Case of the Removal of the President from Office, or of his Death, Resignation, or
Inability to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office, the Sal/1e shall devolve on
the Vice President, and the Congress may by Law provide for the Case of Removal, Death,
Resignation or Inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what Officer
shall then act as President, and such Officer shall act accordingly, until the Disability be
removed, or a President shall be elected. 7
The President shall , at stated Times, receive for hi s Services, a Compensation,
which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the Period for which he
shall have been elected, a nd he shall not receive within that Period any other
Emolument [rom the United States, or any of them.
Before he enter on the Execution of his Office, he shall take the following Oath
or Affirmation:- "I do so lemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the
Office of President of the Un ited States, a nd will to the best of my Ability preserve,
protect and defend the Co nstitution of the United States. "
Section 2. The President shall be Comma nder in Chief of the Army and Navy of
the United States, a nd of the Militia of the several States, when ca ll ed into the actual Service of the United States; he may require the Opinion, in writing, of the
principal Officer in each of the executive Departments, upon any Subject relating to
the Duties of their respective Offices, and he shall have Power to grant Reprieves
and Pardons for Offences against the United States, except in Cases of Impeachment.
He shall have Power, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, to make
Treaties, prOVided two thirds of the Senators present concur; and he shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint
Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the supreme Court,
and all other Officers of the United States, whose Appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by Law: but the Congress may by
Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the
President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments.
The President shall have Power to fill up all Vacancies that may happen during
the Recess of the Senate, by granting Commissions which shall expire at the End of
their next Session.
Section 3. He shall from time to time give to the Congress Information of the
State of the Union , a nd recommend to their Consideration such Measures as he
6. Superseded by Lhe TwelfLh Amendme nl.
7. Modilied by Lhe T wenLy- lillh Amendme nl.

AIO

Appendix
sha ll judge necessary and expedient; he may. on extraordinary Occasions. convene
both Houses. or either of them, and in Case of Disagreement between them, with
Respect to the Time of Adjournment. he may adjourn them to such Tim e as he shall
think proper; he shall receive Ambassadors and other public Ministers: he sha ll take
Care that the Laws be faithfully executed. and shall Commission all the Officers of
the United States.

Impeac hm ent

Section 4. The President, Vice President a nd all civil Officers of the United States,
shall be removed from Office on Impeachment for. and Co nviction of. Treason.
Bribery, or other high Crimes a nd Misdemeanors.
ARTICLE III.

Federal courts

Section 1. The judicial Power of the United States, shall be vested in one supreme
Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain
and establish. The Judges, both of the supreme and inferior Courts. shall hold their
Offices during good Behaviour, and shall , at stated Times. receive for their Services,
a Compensation , which shall not be diminished during their Continuance in Office.

Juri sdiction or cour ts

Section 2. The judicial Power shall extend to all Cases, in Law a nd Equity, arising
under this Constitution, the Laws of the United States. and Treaties made. or which
sha ll be made, under their Authori ty:- to all Cases affecting Amba ssadors, other
public Ministers and Consul s;- to all Cases of admiralty a nd maritime Jurisdiction;- to Controversies to wh ich the United States shall be a Party;- to
Controversies between two or more States;- between a State and Citizens oj another
State;H-between Citizens of different States;- between Citizens of the same State
claiming Lands under Grants of different States, a nd between a State, or the
Citizens thereof. and foreign States. Citizens or Subjects.
In all Cases affecting Ambassadors. other public Ministers a nd Consul s, and
those in which a State shall be Party. the supreme Court sha ll have origina l
Jurisd iction. In all the other Cases before mentioned. the supreme Court shall have
appell ate Jurisdiction, both as to Law and Fact, with such Exceptions. and under
such Regulations as the Congress shall make.
The Trial of all Crimes, except in Cases of Impeachment. shall be by Jury: and
such Trial shall be held in the State where the said Crimes shall have been committed: but when not committed within any State, the Trial sh all be at such Place or
Places as the Congress may by Law have directed.

- original

- appellate

Tr eason

Section 3. Treason against the United States, sha ll consist only in levying War
against them, or in adhering to their Enemies, giving them Aid and Comfort. No
Person sha ll be convicted of Treason unless on the Testimony of two Witnesses to
the same overt Act, or on Co nfession in open Court.
The Congress shall have Power to declare the Punishment of Treason, but no
Atta inder of Treason sha ll work Corruption of Blood. or Forfeiture except during
the Life of the Person attainted.

8. Modilied by t he Eleventh Am endment.

The Constitution of the United States

A 11

ARTICLE IV.
Full faith a nd c redit

Section 1. Full Faith and Credit shall be given in each State to the public Acts,
Records, and judicial Proceedings of every other State. And the Congress may by
general Laws prescribe the Manner in which such Acts, Records and Proceedings
shall be proved, and the Effect thereof.

Privileges and immunities

Section 2. The Citizens of each State shall be entitled to all Privileges and
Immunities of Citizens in the several States.
A person charged in any State with Treason, Felony, or other Crime, who shall
flee from Justice, and be found in another State, sha ll on Demand of the executive
Authority of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed to the
State having Jurisdiction of the Crime.

Extradition

No Person held to Service or Labour in one State, under the Laws thereof, escaping into
anothel; shall, in Consequence oj any Law or Regulation therein, be discharged Jrom such
Service or Labour; but shall be delivered up on Claim oj the Party to whom such Service or
Labour may be due. 9
Cre ation of new states

Gove rning te rritories

Protec tion of s tates

Section 3.

New States may be admitted by the Congress into this Union; but no
new State shall be formed or erected within the Jurisdiction of any other State; nor
any State be formed by the Junction of two or more States, or Parts of States. without the Consent of the Legislatures of the States concerned as well as of the
Congress.
The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules and
Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the United
States; and nothing in this Constitution shall be so construed as to Prejudice any
Claims of the United States, or of any particular State.

Section 4. The Un ited States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a
Republican Form of Government, and shall protect each of them against Invasion:
and on Application of the Legislature, or of the Executive (when the Legislature
cannot be convened) against domestic Violence.
ARTICLE V.

Am e nding the Con stitution

The Congress, whenever two thirds of both Houses shall deem it necessary, shall
propose Amendments to this Constitution, or, on the Application of the Legislatures
of two thirds of the several States, shall call a Convention for proposing
Amendments, which, in either Case, shall be valid to all Intents and Purposes, as
Part of this Constitution, when ratified by the Legislatures of three fourths of the
several States, or by Conventions in three fourths thereof, as the one or the other
Mode of Ratification may be proposed by the Congress; Provided that no
Amendment which may be made prior to the Year One thousand eight hundred
and eight sha ll in any Manner a lter the first and fourth Clauses in the Ninth Section
of the first Article; and that no State. without its Consent. shall be deprived of its
equal Suffrage in the Senate.

9 . Changed by the Thirteenth Amendment.

Al2

Appendix

ARTICLE VI.
Assu mpti on o r debts o r
Co nreder a li on

Sup re m acy o f federa l law s and
treaties

No re ligi o u s te st

All Debts contracted a nd Engagements entered into, before the Adoption of this
Co nstitution, shall be as va lid against the United States under this Constitution, as
under the Confederation.
This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in
Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties mad e, or which shall be made, under the
Authority of the United States, shall be the Supreme Law of the Land; and the
Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or Laws
of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding.
The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the Members of the
several State Legislatures, and all executive and judicial Officers, both of the United
States and of the several States, shall be bound by Oath or Affirmation, to support
this Constitution; but no reli giou s Test shall ever be required as a Qualification to
any Office or public Trust under the United States.

ARTICLE VII.
Rali fi c at io n proc edur e

The Ratincation of the Conventions of nine States, shall be surDcient for the
Establishment of this Co nstitution between the States so ratifying the Same.

Done in Convention by the Unanimous Consent of the States present the Seventeenth Day
of September in the Year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and Eighty seven and of
the Independence of the United States of America the Twelfth In witness whereof We have
hereunto subscribed our Na mes,
G?ASHINGTON-Presid ~

and deputy from Virginia

JOHN LANGDO N

New Hampshire

{

Massachusetts

{

N ICHOLAS G lLMA N
NATH AN IEL GORHAM

Connecticut
New

W ~' SAM~' JOHNSON
{

York

R OGER SHERMAN
ALEXANDER H AMlI; ro N

RUFUS KI NG

!

JAMES M CH ENHY

New Jersey

WI!,: L. IVINGSTO N
DAVID BREARLEY

1

Maryland

D ANL CARROLL

W.'~ PATERSON

JO NA: D AYTON

D AN OF S T THO ~ J EN IFER

Virginia

JOH N BLArR{

JAMES MADISO N JR.

B FRANKLIN

W.~ BLO UNT

THOMAS MIFFLlN
ROB ': MORRIS

Pennsylvania

No rth Carolina

GEO. CLYMER

H u WILLIAMSO N

THo~ FIT'i SrMONS

J. R UTLEDGE

JARED I NGER SOLL
JAMES WILSO N
GODV MORRI S

!

RICH'? DOBBS SPAIGHT

South Carolina

CHARLES COTES WORTH PINCK NEY

1

C HARLES PINCKNEY

PIERCE BUTLER

Th e Constitution of the United States

Delaware

GEO: READ
GU NN INGBIlDFORD jun
JOHNDICKINSO
{ RI CHA RD BASSEr I'
JACO: BROOM

Georgia

{

A13

W ILLIAM FEW
ABR BALDWIN

{The first ten arnendl1'lents. known as the "Bill oj Rights." were ratified in 1 79 1.}
AMENDME T 1.
Fr ee d o m o r r e ligio n . s pee c h.
pre ss. a ssc mbl y

Congress shall make no law respecting a n establishment of religion. or prohibitin g
the free exercise thereof. or abrid ging the freedom of speech . or of the press; or th e
ri ght of the people peaceably to assembl e. and to petition th e Government for a redress of grievances.
AMENDMENT II.

Rig ht to be ar a rm s

A well regula ted Militia, being n ecessary to the security of a free Sta te. the right of
the people to keep a nd bear Arm s. sh all n ot be infringed.
AMENDMENT III.

Quart e rin g troo ps in pri va te
ho m es

No So ldier shall. in time of peace be quartered in a ny house withou t the consent of
the Owner. nor in time of war, bu t in a ma nner to be prescribed by law.
AMENDMENT IV.

P r o hibiti o n agai nst
unrea so n a bl e se a r c h es a n d
se iZll res

The right of the people to be secure in their perso ns. houses. papers, a nd effects.
against unreasona ble searches a nd seizures. shall not be violated. a nd no Warra nts
sh a ll issu e. but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or a ffirmation . a nd pa rticula rly describing the place to be searched, a nd the persons or thin gs to be seized.
AMENDMENT V.

Ri g ht w h e n a cc u sed:
" du e- pr ocess " c la u se

o perso n shall be held to a nswer for a capital. or other wise infa mous crime. un less
on a presentment or ind ictment of a Gra nd Jury. except in cases a rising in the la nd
or n ava l forces. or in the Militia. when in actu a l ser vice in time of War or public
da n ger: nor shall any person be subj ect for the sa me offen ce to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb: nor sh a ll be compelled in a ny crimina l case to be a witness
aga inst himself. nor be deprived of life. liberty. or property. w ith ou t due process of
law. n or sha ll private property be ta ken for publi c use. without just co mpensation.
AMENDMENT VI.

Rig ht s w hc n o n t r ia l

In all criminal prosecutions. th e accused shall enj oy th e right to a speedy a nd public
trial. by a n impa rti al jury of the State a nd district wherein the crime shall have
been committed . which district sha ll have been previously ascertained by law. a nd
to be informed of the n ature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the
witn esses against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining w itn esses in his
favor. a nd to have t he Assistance of Coun sel for his defence.

A14

Appendix

AMENDMENT VII.
Co mmon-law s uit s

In Suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars,
the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact tried by a jury. shall be otherwise reexamined in any Court of the United States, than according to the rules of
the common law.
AMENDME T VIII.

Bail: no "crucl and unusual"
punishmcnts

Excessive bail sha ll not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
AME DME TIX.

Un c num e rated rights protc c tcd

The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to
deny or disparage others retained by the people.
AMENDMENT X.

Powcrs reserved for states

The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by
it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.
AMENDME IT XI.
[Ratified in 1795.]

Limi ts on s uits aga in st statcs

The Judicial power of the United States sha ll not be construed to extend to any suit
in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by
Citizens of another state. or by Citizens or Subjects of any Foreign State.
AMENDMENT XII.
[Ratified in 1804.]

Rev is ion of electora l- co ll cgc
pro ccd u r e

The Electors shall meet in their respective states and vote by ballot for President and
Vice President, one of whom. at least, sha ll not be an inhabitant of the same state
with themselves; they sha ll name in their ballots the person voted for as President,
and in distinct ballots the person voted for as Vice Pres ident, and they shall make
distinct lists of all persons voted for as Presid ent, and of all persons voted for as Vice
President. and of the number of votes for each, which lists they sha ll sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of government of the United States. directed to
the President of the Senate;-The President of' the Senate shall, in the presence of
the Senate and House of' Representatives. open all the certificates and the votes
shall then be counted;- The person having the greatest number of votes far
President, shall be the Pres ident, if such number be a majority of the whole number
of Electors appointed: and if no person have such majority. then from the persons
having the highest numbers not exceed ing three on the li st of those voted for as
President, the House of Representatives shall choose immediately, by ballot, the
President. But in chOOSing the President. the votes shall be taken by states, the representation from each state having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist
of a member or members from two-th irds of the states. and a majority of a ll the

Tf,e Constitution of the United States

A15

states shall be necessary to a cho ice. And iJ the House oj Hepresentatives shall not
choose a President whenever the right oj choice shall devolve upon them, beJore the Jourth
day oj Marcil next Jollowing, then the Vice President shall act as President, as in the case
oj the death or other constitutional disability oj the President. - Io The person having
the grea test number of votes as Vice P resident, shall be the Vice President, if such
number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed. and if no person
have a majority. then from the two highest numbers on the li st. the Senate shall
choose the Vice President; a quorum for the purpose sha ll consist of two-third s of
the whole number of Senators. and a majority of the whole number shall be necessary to a choice. But no person constitutionally ineli gibl e to the office of President
sha ll be eligible to that of Vice President of the United States.
AMENDMENT XIII.
[Ratified in 1865.]
S laver y pro hibit ed

Section 1. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude. except as a punishment for
crime whereof the party sh a ll have been duly convicted. shall exist within the
United States. or any place subj ectto their jurisdiction.
Section 2.

Congress sha ll have power to enforce this a rticl e by appropriate

legislation.
AMENDMENT XlV.
[Hatified in 1868.]
Ex -s laves mad e c iti ze n s

"Du e -pro c e ss " c lau se a ppli cdto
s ta Les
" Equa l-prot ec tion " clau se

Sect jon 1.

All persons born or naturalized in the United States a nd subj ect to the
jurisdi ction thereof. are citizens of the Un ited States a nd of the State wherein they
res ide. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or
immuniti es of citizens of the United States; nor shall a ny State deprive any person
of life. liberty. or property. without du e process of law: nor deny to any person
within its jurisdiction the eq ual protection of the laws.

Section 2.

Re du c t ion in c ong r es s ion a l
r e pr es en t a tion 1'01' s Late s
denying adulLma le s th e righL
Lo vote

Representatives sha ll be apportioned among the severa l States according to their respective numbers. co unting the whole number of persons in each State.
excludin g Indians not taxed. But when the right to vote at a ny election for the choice
of electors for President a nd Vice President of the United States. Representatives in
Congress. the Executive a nd Judicia l officers of a State, or the members of the
Legislature thereof, is denied to a ny of the mal e inhabi ta nts of such State, being
twenty-oneil years of age and citizens of the United States, or in a ny way abridged, except for participation in rebellion. or other crime. the basis of representation therein
shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear
to the whole number of ma le citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.

Sout h er n rebels denied
fed e ral o ffi ce

Section 3.

No person sha ll be a Senator or Representative in Congress, or elector
of Pres ident and Vice President. or hold any office, civil or military, under the

10. Cha nged by the Twe ntieth Amcndmcnl. scction 3.
I I. Ch a nged by the Twe n ty-sixth Ame ndmcn l.

A16

Appendix

United States. or under a ny State. who, having previously ta ken a n oa th. as a member of Congress. or as an officer of the United States, or as a member of any State
legislature, or as an executive or judicial offi cer of a ny State. to support th e
Constitution of the United Sta tes, shall have engaged in in surrecti on or rebellion
against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof. But Congress may
by a vote of two-thirds of each House. remove such disability.
Re be l deb ts re pudi ate d

Section 4. The validity of the public debt of the United States, auth orized by law. including debts incurred for payment of pensions and bounties for services in suppressing insurrection or rebellion. shall not be questioned. But neither the United States
nor any State shall assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion against the United States. or a ny cla im for the loss or emancipation of
any slave: but all such debts. obli gations a nd claims shall be held illega l and void.
Section 5. The Congress sha ll have power to enforce, by appropriate legislation ,
the provisions of this articl e.
AMENDMENT Xv.
[Ratified in 1870. ]

Bla c ks give n ri gh t to vote

Section 1. The righ t of ci tizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or
abridged by the United States or by a ny State on account of race. color. or previou s
condition of servitude.
Section 2.
legislati on.

The Congress sha ll have power to enforce this article by appropriate

AMENDMENT XVI.
[Ra tified in 1913.]
Auth o ri ze s fede ral in co me tax

The Congress sha ll have power to lay a nd collect taxes on incomes. from whatever
source derived. without apportionment a mon g the severa l States. a nd without rega rd to a ny census or enumeration.

AMENDMENT XVII.
[Ratified in 1913.]
Requires pop ul a r e lec ti o n o f
se n ato r s

The Senate of the United States sha ll be composed of two Senators from each State.
elected by the people thereof, for six years: a nd each Senator shall have one vote.
The electors in each Sta te shall have the qua lification s requi site for electors of the
most numerous branch of the State legislatures.
When vacancies ha ppen in the representation of any State in the Senate. the executive a uthority of such State shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies:
Provided. That the legislature o[ a ny State may empower th e executive thereof to
make temporary appOintments until the people fill the vaca ncies by election as the
legisla ture may direct.
This amendment shall not be so construed as to affect the election or term of
any Senator ch osen before it becomes va lid as part of the Constitution.

-t

The Constitution oj'the United States

A17

AMENDMENT XVIII.
[Ratified in 1919.]
Prohibits m a nufa c ture and sa le
o f liquor

After one yea r ji-om the ratification of this article the manufacture, sale, or
transportation of intoxicating liquors within, the importation thereof into, or the exportation thereof Jrom the United States and all territory subject to the jurisdiction thereoJ Jar
beverage purposes is hereby prohibited.

Section 1.

The Congress and the several States shall have concurrent power to enforce
this article by appropriate legislation.

Section 2.

Section 3.

This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an
amendment to the Constitution by tile legislatures oj the several States, as provided in the
Constitution, within seven yea rs fi-olrl the date of the submission hereof to the States by
the Congress. 12
AMENDMENT XIX.
[Ratified in 1920.]

Right t o vote for women

The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by
the United States or by any State on account of sex.
Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.

AMENDMENT XX.
[Ratified in 1933.]
Federa l term s of office to beg in
in Januar y

Section 1. The terms of the President and Vice President sha ll end at noon on
the 20th day of January, and the terms of Senators and Representatives at noon on
the 3d day of January, of the years in which such terms would have ended if this article had not been ratified; and the terms of their successors shall then begin.
Section 2. The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such
meeting shall begin at noon on the 3d day of January, unless they sha ll by law appoint a different day.

Em e rge n cy pre s idential
sLlccess io n

Section 3. If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the President, the
President elect shall have died, the Vice President elect sha ll become President. If a
President sha ll not have been chosen before the time fixed for the beg inning of his
term, or if the President elect shall have faUed to qualify, then the Vice President
elect shall act as President until a President shall have qualified; and the Congress
may by law provide for the case wherein neither a President elect nor a Vice
President elect shall have qualified, declaring who sha ll then act as President, or the
mann er in which one who is to act shall be selected. and such person sha ll act accord ingly until a President or Vice President shall have qualified.

12. Repea led by thc Twcnty-lirst Amendment.

A18

Appendix
Section 4. The Congress may by law provide for the case of th e dea th of any of
the persons from whom the House of Representatives may choose a President
whenever the right of choice sha ll have devolved upon them. and for the case of the
death of any of the persons from whom the Senate may choose a Vice President
whenever the right of choice shall have devo lved upon them.
Section 5. Sections 1 a nd 2 shall take effect on th e 15th day of October followin g
the ratification of this article.
Section 6. Thi s article sha ll be inoperative unl ess it shall have been ratifi ed as an
amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several
States within seven years from the date of its submiss ion.
AMENDMENT XXI.
[Ratified in 1933.]

Re peal s Prohibit ion

Section 1. The eighteenth article of a men dment to the Constitution of the
United States is hereby repealed.
Section 2. The transportation or importation into any State. Territory, or possession of the United States for delivery or use therein of intoxi ca ting liqu ors, in violation of the laws thereof. is hereby prohibited.
Section 3. This article sha ll be inoperative unless it sha ll have been ratified as an
a mendment to the Constitution by conventions in the several States. as provided in
the Constitution, within seven years from the date of submission hereof to the
States by the Congress.
AMENDMENT XXII.
[Ratified in 1951.]

Two-term limi t for president

Section 1. No person sha ll be elected to the office of the President more than
twice. and no person who has held the office of President. or acted as President. for
more than two years of a term to which some other person was elected President
sha ll be elected to the office of President more than once. But this Articl e shall not
apply to a ny person holding the office of President when thi s Article was proposed
by the Congress, and sha ll not prevent any person who may be holdin g the office of
President, or acting as President. during the term within which this Article becomes operative from holding the office of President or acting as Pres ident durin g
the remainder of such term .
Section 2. This Article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an
amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the severa l
States within seven years from the date of its submission to the States by the Congress.
AMENDMENT XXIII.
[Ratified in 1961.]

Ri g ht to vote for pres id ent in
Distr ict o f Co lumbi a

Section 1. The District constituting the seat of Government of the United States
sh all appoint in such mann er as the Congress may direct:

The Constitution of the United States

Al9

A number of electors of President and Vice President equal to the whole number of Senators and Representatives in Congress to which the District would be entitled if it were a State, but in no event more than the least populous State: they sha ll
be in addition to those appointed by the States, but they shall be considered, for the
purposes of the election of President and Vice President, to be electors appointed by
a State; and they shall meet in the District and perform such duties as provided by
the twelfth article of amendment.

Section 2.
legislation.

The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate

AMENDMENT XXIV.
[Ratified il1 1964.]
Prohibits poll taxes in federal
elections

Section 1. The right of citizens of the United States to vote in any primary or
other election for President or Vice President, for electors for President or Vice
President, or for Senator or Representative in Congress, shall not be denied or
abridged by the United States or any State by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or
other tax.
Section 2. The Congress shall have the power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
AMENDMENT XXV.
[Ratified il1 1967.]

Pr esidential di sability and
suc cess ion

Section 1. In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or
resignation, the Vice President sha ll become President.
Section 2. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the
President shall nominate a Vice President who shall take office upon confirmation
by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress.
Section 3. Whenever the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the
Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that
he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and until he transmits
to them a written declaration to the contrary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President.
Section 4. Whenever the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law
provide, transmit to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the
House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to
discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately
assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President.
Thereafter, when the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the
Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration
that no inability exists, he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless
the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive

A20

Appendix

department[s] or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit
within four days to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the
House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to
discharge the powers and duties of his office. Thereupon Congress shall decide the
issue, assemb ling within forty-eight hours for that purpose if not in session. II' the
Congress, within twenty-one days after receipt of the latter wr itten declaration, or,
if Congress is not in session, within twenty-one days after Congress is required to
assemble, determines by two-thirds vote of both Houses that the Pres ident is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the President shall
resume the powers and duties of his office.
AMENDMENT XXVI.
[Ratified in 1971 .]
Voting age lowered to eighteen

Section 1. The right of citizens of the United States, who are eighteen years of
age or older, to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the Un ited States or by any
State on account of age.
Section 2.
legislation.

The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate

AMENDMENT XXVII.
[Ratified in 1992.]
Congress ional pay raises

No law varying the compensation for the services of the Senators and Representatives shall take effect, until an election of Representatives shall have intervened.

*

THE FEDERALIST NO.1 0
November 22,1787

James Madison

TO THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
Among the numerous advantages promised by a well constructed Union, none deserves to be more accurately developed than its tendency to break and control the violence of faction. The friend of popular governments, never finds himself so much
alarmed for their character and fate, as when he contemplates their propensity to this
dangerous vice. He will not fail therefore to set a due value on any plan which, without violating the principles to which he is attached, provides a proper cure for it. The
instability, injustice and confusion introduced into the public councils, have in truth
been the mortal diseases under which popular governments have every where perished; as they continue to be the favorite and fruitful topics from which the adversaries to liberty derive their most specious declamations. The valuable improvements
made by the American Constitutions on the popular models, both ancient and modern, cannot certainly be too much admired; but it would be an unwarrantable partiality, to contend that they have as effectua lly obviated the danger on this side as was
wished and expected. Complaints are every where heard from our most considerate
and virtuous citizens, equally the friends of public and private faith, and of public
and personal liberty; that our governments are too unstable; that the public good is
disregarded in the conflicts of rival parties; and that measures are too often decided,
not according to the rules of justice, and the rights of the minor party; but by the superior force of an interested and over-bearing majority. However anxiously we may
wish that these complaints had no foundation, the evidence of known facts will not
permit us to deny that they are in some degree true. It will be found indeed, on a candid review of our situ ation, that some of the distresses under which we labor, have
been erroneously charged on the operation of our governments; but it will be found,
at the same time, that other causes will not alone account for many of our heaviest
misfortunes: and particularly, for that prevailing and increasing distrust of public engagements, and alarm for private rights, which are echoed from one end of the continent to the other. These must be chiefly, if not wholly, effects of the unsteadiness and
injustice, with which a factious spirit has tainted our public administrations.
By a faction I understand a number of citizens, whether amounting to a majority or minority of the whole, who are united and actuated by some common impulse of passion, or of interest, adverse to the rights of other citizens, or to the
permanent and aggregate interests of the community.
There are two methods of curing the mischiefs of faction: the one, by removing
its causes; the other, by controlling its effects.
There are again two methods of removing the causes of faction: the one by destroying the liberty which is essential to its existence; the other, by giving to every
citizen the same opinions, the same passions, and the same interests.

A21

A22

Appendix
It co uld never be more truly sa id than of the first remedy, that it is worse than
the di sease. Liberty is to faction , what air is to fire, an a liment without which it instantly expires. But it co uld not be a less folly to abolish liberty, which is essential to
politica l life, because it nouri shes fa ction , than it would be to wish th e annihi lation
of air, which is essential to anima l lire, beca use it imparts to fire its destructive
agency.
The second expedient is as impra cticabl e. as the first would be unwise. As long
as the reason of ma n continues fallibl e, and he is at liberty to exercise it, different
opinions wi ll be formed. As long as the connection subsists between his reason and
hi s self-l ove, his opinions and his passions will have a reciprocal influence on each
other; a nd the former w ill be objects to which the latter will attach themselves. The
diversity in the facuIties of men from whi ch the rights of property originate. is not
less an in superable obstacle to a uniformity of interests. The protection of these faculties is the first object of Government. From the protection of different a nd unequal fa culties of acquiring property, the possession of different degrees and kind s
of property immediately results: a nd from the influence of these on the sentiments
and views of the respective proprietors, ensues a division of th e society into different interests a nd parti es.
The latent causes of faction are thus sown in the nature of man: a nd we see
them every where brought into different degrees of activity, according to the different circumsta nces of civil society. A zeal for different opinions co ncerning religion,
co ncerning Government and many other points, as well of speculation as of practice; an attachment to different leaders ambitiously contending for pre-eminence
and power; or to persons of other description s whose fortunes have been interesting
to the human passions, have in turn divided mankind into parties, inflamed them
with mutual animosity, and rendered them much more disposed to vex and oppress
eac h other, than to cooperate for their common good. So strong is this propen sity of
mankind to fall into mutual anim osities, that where no substantia l occasion presents itself. the most frivo lous and fanciful di stinctions have been sufficient to kindle
their unfri endly passions, and excite their most violent conflicts. But the most common and durable source of factions, ha s been the various a nd un equal distribution
of property. Those who hold , and those who are without property, have ever formed
distinct interests in society. Those who are creditors, and those who are debtors, fall
under a like discrimination . A landed interest. a manufacturing interest, a mercantile interest, a monied interest, with many lesser interests, grow up of necessity in
civilized nations, and divide th em into different classes, actuated by different sentiments and views . The regul ation of th ese various and interferin g interests forms
the principa l task of modern Legislation, and involves th e spirit of party and faction
in the necessa ry and ordinary operations of Government.
No man is a llowed to be judge in his own ca use; beca use hi s interest would certainly bias his judgment, and , not improbably, corrupt hi s in tegrity. With equal. nay
with greater reason, a body of men , are unfit to be judges a nd parti es, at the same
time; yet, what are many of the most important acts of legislation, but so many judicial determinations, not indeed concerning the rights of single perso ns, but concerning the rights of large bodies of citizens, and what are the different classes of
legislators, but advocates and parties to the causes which they determine? Is a law
proposed concerning private debts? It is a qu estion to which the creditors are parties on one side, a nd the debtors on the other. Justice ough t to hold the bala nce be-

The Federalist No.1 0

A23

tween them. Yet the parties a re a nd must be themselves the judges; a nd the most
num erous party, or, in other words. the most powerful fa ction must be expected to
prevail. Shall domestic manufactures be encouraged, a nd in what deg ree. by restri ctions on foreign ma nufactures? are questions which would be differently decided by
the la nd ed and th e ma nufacturin g classes; a nd probably by neither. with a so le rega rd to justice and the public good. The apportionment of taxes on the various descriptions of property. is an act which seems to require the most exact impartiality;
yet. there is perhaps no leg islative act in which greater opportunity and temptation
are given to a predomina nt party. to trample on the rul es of justice. Every shilling
with which they over-burden the inferior number. is a shillin g saved to their own
pockets.
It is in va in to say. that enli ghtened statesmen will be able to adjust these clashing interests, and render them all subser vient to the public good . Enlightened
statesmen will not always be at the helm: or. in many cases. can such an adjustment be made at all. without taking into view indirect and remote considerations.
which will rarely prevail over the immediate interest which one party may find in
disregarding the rights of another. or the good of the whole.
The inference to which we a re brought. is, that the ca uses of faction cannot be
removed; and that relief is only to be sou ght in th e means of controlling its effects.
If a faction cons ists of less than a maj ority. relief is supplied by the republican
principle. which enables the majority to defeat its sinister views by regular vote: It
may clog the administration. it may convulse the society; but it wi ll be unable to execute a nd mask its violence under the forms of the Co nstituti on. When a majority is
included in a faction. the form of popul ar government on the other ha nd enables it
to sacrifice to its ruling passion or interest. both the pub li c good and the rights of
other citizens. To secure the public good. and private rights. against the danger of
such a fa ction. and at the sa me time to preserve the spirit a nd th e form of popul ar
government. is then the great obj ect to which our inquiries are directed: Let me add
that it is the great desid eratum. by which alone this form of government can be rescued from the opprobrium under which it has so long labored. and be recommended to the esteem and adoption of mankind.
By what means is this obj ect attainable? Evidently by one of two only. Either the
existence of the same passion or interest in a majority at the same time. must be
prevented; or the majority. having such co-existent passion or interest. must be rendered. by their number and local situation, unabl e to concert and carry into effect
schemes of oppression. If the impulse and the opportunity be suffered to coincide.
we well know that neither moral nor religious motives can be relied on as an adequate control. They are not found to be such on the injustice and vio lence of individuals. a nd lose their efficacy in proportion to the number combined together: that
is. in proportion as their efficacy becomes needful.
From this view of the subj ect. it may be concluded. that a pure Democracy. by
which I mea n. a Society, consistin g of a small number of citizens. who assemb le
a nd ad minister the Government in person. can admit of no cure for the mischiefs of
faction. A co mmon passion or interest will. in almost every case. be felt by a majority
of the whole; a communication a nd co ncert resu lts from the form of Government
itse lf; and there is nothing to check the inducements to sacrifi ce the weaker party.
or a n obnoxious individua l. Hence it is. that such Democracies have ever been
spectacles of turbulence and co ntention; have ever been found in compatible with

A24

Appendix
personal security, or the rights of property: and have in general been as short in
their lives, as they have been violent in their deaths. Theoretic politicians, who have
patronized this species of Government, have erroneously supposed, that by reducing mankind to a perfect equality in their political rights, they would, at the same
time, be perfectly equalized and assim il ated in their possessions, their opinions, and
their passions.
A republic, by which I mean a government in which the scheme of representation takes place, opens a different prospect, and promises the cure for which we are
seeking. Let us examine the points in which it varies from pure democracy, and we
shall comprehend both the nature of the cure and the efficacy which it must derive
from the union.
The two great points of difference, between a democracy and a republic, are,
first, the delegation of the government, in the latter, to a small number of citizens,
elected by the rest; secondly, the greater number of citizens, and greater sphere of
country, over which the latter may be extended.
The effect of the first difference is, on the one hand, to refine and enlarge the
public views, by passing them through the medium of a chosen body of citizens,
whose wisdom may best discern the true interest of their country, and whose patriotism and love of justice, will be least likely to sacrifice it to temporary or partial
considerations. Under such a regulation, it may well happen, that the public voice,
pronounced by the representatives of the people, will be more consonant to the
public good , than if pronounced by the people themselves, convened for the purpose. On the other hand the effect may be inverted. Men of factious tempers, of
local prejudices, or of sinister designs, may by intrigue, by corruption , or by other
means, first obtain the suffrages, and then betray the interest of the people. The
question resulting is, whether small or extensive republics are most favorable to the
election of proper guardians of the public weal, and it is clearly decided in favor of
the latter by two obvious considerations.
In the first place, it is to be remarked that, however small the republic may be,
the representatives must be raised to a certain number, in order to guard against
the cabals of a few; and that however large it may be. they must be limited to a certain number, in order to guard against the confusion of a multitude. Hence, the
number of representatives in the two cases not being in proportion to that of the
constituents, and being proportionally greatest in the small republic, it follows, that
if the proportion of fit characters be not less in the large than in the small republic,
the former will present a greater option, and consequently a greater probability of a
fit choice.
In the next place, as each Representative will be chosen by a greater number of
citizens in the large than in the small Republic, it will be more difficult for unworthy
candidates to practise with success the vicious arts. by which elections are too often
carried; and the suffrages of the people being more free, will be more likely to center
on men who possess the most attractive merit, and the most diffusive and established characters.
It must be confessed , that in this, as in most other cases, there is a mean, on
both sides of which inconveniences will be found to lie. By en larging too much the
number of electors, you render the representatives too little acquainted with all
their local circumstances and lesser interests; as by reducing it too much, you render him unduly attached to these, and too li ttle fit to comprehend and pursue great

------------------------------------~=========================-====--------------------------

The Federalist No. 10

A25

and national objects. The Federal Constitution forms a happy combination in this
respect; the great and aggregate interests being referred to the na tional. the local
and particular. to the state legislatures.
The other point of difference is. the greater number of citizens a nd extent of territory which may be brought within the compass of Republican. than of Democratic Government; and it is this circumsta nce prinCipally which renders factious
combinations less to be dreaded in the former. than in the latter. The smaller the society. the fewer probably will be the distinct parties a nd interests composing it; the
fewer the distinct parties and interests. the more frequently will a majority be found
of the sa me party; and the smaller the number of individuals composing a majority.
and the smaller the co mpass within which they are placed. the more easily they will
concert and execute their plans of oppression. Extend the sphere. and you take in a
greater variety of parties and interests; you make it less probable that a majority of
the whole will have a common motive to invade the rights of other citizens; or if
such a common motive exists . it will be more difficult for all who feel it to discover
their own strength. and to act in unison with each other. Besides other impediments. it may be remarked. that where there is a consciousness of unjust or dishonorable purposes. communication is always checked by distrust. in proportion to the
number whose concurrence is necessary.
Hence it clearly appears. that the same advantage. which a Republic has over a
Democracy. in controlling the effects of factions. is enj oyed by a large over a small
Republic- is enjoyed by the Union over the States composing it. Does this advantage consist in th e substitution of Representatives. whose enlightened views a nd
virtuous sentiments render them superior to local prejudices. and to schemes of in justice? It will not be denied. that the Representation of the Union will be most
likely to possess these requisite end owments. Does it co nsist in the grea ter security
afford ed by a greater variety of parties. against the event of a nyone party being
able to outnumber and oppress the rest? In an eq ual degree does the increase variety of parties. co mprised within the Uni on. increase this security ? Does it. in fine.
consist in the greater obstacles opposed to the co ncert and accomplishment of the
secret wishes of an unjust and interested majority ? Here. again. the extent of the
Union gives it the most palpable advantage.
The influence of factious leaders may kindl e a fla me within their particular
States. but will be unable to spread a general confl agration through the other
States: a religious sect. may degenerate into a political faction in a part of the
Confederacy but the variety of sects dispersed over the entire face of it. must secure
the national Councils against any danger from that source: a rage for paper money.
for an abolition of debts. for an equ al division of property. or for any other impro per
or wicked project. will be less apt to pervade the whole body of the Union. than a
particular member of it; in the same proportion as such a malady is more likely to
taint a particular county or district. than an entire State.
In the extent and proper stru cture of the Union. therefore. we behold a
Rep ubli ca n remedy for the diseases most in cident to Republican Government. And
accordin g to the degree of pl easure and pride. we feel in being Republicans. ought
to be our zea l in cheri shing th e spirit. and supporting the character of Federalists.
PUB LIUS

~

THE FEDERALIST NO. 51
February 6, 1788

James Madison
TO THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
To what expedient then shall we finally resort for maintaining in practice the necessary partition of power among the several departmen ts, as laid down in the constitution? The only answer that can be given is, that as all these exterior provisions are
found to be inadequate, the defect must be supplied, by so contriving the interior
structure of the government, as that its several constituent parts may, by their mutual relations, be the mea ns of keeping each other in their proper pl aces. Without
presuming to undertake a full development of this impor tant idea, I will hazard a
few general observations, which may perhaps place it in a clearer light. and en able
us to form a more correct judgment of the principles and structure of the governmen t planned by the convention.
In order to lay a due foundation for that separate and distinct exercise of the different powers of government. which to a certain extent. is admitted on all hands to
be essential to the preservation of liberty. it is evident that each department should
have a will of its own; and consequently should be so co nstituted, th at the members
of each should have as little agency as possible in the appointment of the members
of the others. Were this principle rigorously adhered to, it would require that all the
appointments for the supreme executive, legislative, and judiciary magistracies,
should be drawn from the sa me founta in of a uthority, the people. through channels, having no communication whatever with one another. Perhaps such a plan of
constructing the several departments would be less difficul t in practice than in it
may in contemplation appear. Some difficulties however, and some additional expense, would attend the execution of it. Some deviations therefore from the principle must be admitted. In the constitution of the judiciary department in particular,
it might be inexpedient to insist rigorously on the principle: first , because peculiar
qualifications being essential in the members, the primary consideration ought to
be to select that mode of choice, which best secures these qualifications; secondly,
because the permanent tenure by which the appointments are held in that departmen t, must soon destro)) all sense of dependence on the a uthority conferring them.
It is equally evident that the members of each department should be as little dependent as possible on those of the others, for the emoluments annexed to their offices. Were the executive magistrate, or the judges, not independent of the legislature
in this particul ar, their independence in every other would be merely nominal.
But the great security against a gradu al concentration of the several powers in
the same department, co nsists in givin g to those who administer each department,
the necessa ry constitutional mea ns, and personal motives. to resist encroachments of the others. The provision for defense must in this, as in all other cases, be
made commensurate to th e danger of attack. Ambition must be made to counterA26

The Federalist No. 51

A27

act ambition. The interest of the man must be connected with the constitutional
right of the place. It may be a reflection on human nature. that such devices
should be necessary to control the abuses of government. But what is government
itself but the greatest of aLI reflections on human nature? If men were angels, no
government would be necessary. If angels were to govern men. neither external
nor internal controls on government would be necessary. In framing a government
which is to be administered by men over men, the great difficulty lies in this: You
must first enable the government to control the governed; and in the next place,
oblige it to control itself. A dependence on the people is no doubt the primary control on the government; but experience has taught mankind the necessity of auxiliary precautions.
This policy of supplying by opposite and rival interests, the defect of better
motives, might be traced through the whole system of human affairs, private as
well as public. We see it particularly displayed in all the subordinate distributions of
power; where the constant aim is to divide and arrange the several offices in such a
manner as that each may be a check on the other; that the private interest of every
individual, may be a sentinel over the public rights. These inventions of prudence
cannot be less requisite in the distribution of the supreme powers of the state.
But it is not possible to give each department an equal power of self defense. In
republican government the legislative authority, necessarily, predominates. The
remedy for this inconvenience is, to divide the legislative into different branches:
and to render them by different modes of election, and different principles of action.
as little connected with each other, as the nature of their common functions. and
their common dependence on the society, will admit. It may even be necessary to
guard against dangerous encroachments by still further precautions. As the weight
of the legislative authority requires that it should be thus divided. the weakness of
the executive may require, on the other hand, that it should be fortified. An absolute negative, on the legislature, appears at first view to be the natural defense
with which the executive magistrate should be armed. But perhaps it would be neither altogether safe, nor alone sufficient. On ordinary occasions, it might not be exerted with the requisite firmness , and on extraordinary occasions, it might be
prefidiously abused. May not this defect of an absolute negative be supplied, by
some qualified connection between this weaker department. and the weaker branch
of the stronger department, by which the latter may be led to support the constitutional rights of the former, without being too much detached from the rights of its
own department?
If the principles on which these observations are founded be just, as I persuade
myself they are, and they be applied as a criterion, to the several state constitutions,
and to the federal constitution, it will be found , that if the latter does not perfectly
correspond with them, the former are infinitely less able to bear such a test.
There are moreover two considerations particularly applicable to the federal system of America, which place the system in a very interesting point of view.
First. In a single republic, all the power surrendered by the people, is submitted
to the administration of a single government; and usurpations are guarded against
by a division of the government into distinct and separate departments. In the compound republic of America, the power surrendered by the people, is first divided between two distinct governments, and then the portion allotted to each, subdivided
among distinct and separate departments. Hence a double security arises to the

A28

Appendix
rights of the people. The different governments wi ll control each other; at the same
time that each will be contro lled by itself.
Second. It is of great importance in a republic, not on ly to guard the society
against the oppression of its rulers; but to guard one part of the society aga inst the
injustice of the other part. Different interests necessarily exist in different cl asses of
citizens. If a majority be united by a common interest, the rights of the minority
will be insecure. Th ere are but two methods of providing against this ev U: The one
by creating a will in the community independent of the majority, that is. of the society itself. the other by co mprehendin g in the society so many separate descriptions
of citizens, as will render an unjust comb ination of a majority of the whole, very
improbable, if not impra cticable. The first method prevails in all governments possessing an hereditary or self appointed a uthority. This at best is but a precarious security; beca use a power independent of the society may as well espouse the unjust
views of the major, as the rightful in terests. of the minor party, and may possibly be
turned against both parties. The second method will be exemplified in the federal republic of the United States. While all a uthority in it wi ll be derived from a nd dependent on the society, the society itself will be broken into so many parts, interests and
classes of citizens, that the rights of individuals or of the minority, will be in little
danger from interested co mbinations of the majority. In a free government, the security for civil rights must be the same as for religious rights. It co nsists in the one
case in the multiplicity of interests, and in the other, in the multiplicity of sects. The
degree of security in both cases will depend on the number of interests a nd sects;
a nd this may be presu med to depend on the extent of co untry and number of people comprehended under the same government. This view of the subject must particularly recommend a proper federal system to all the sincere a nd consid erate
fri ends of republica n govern ment: Since it shows that in exact proportion as the territory of the union may be formed into more circumscribed confederacies or states,
oppressive combinations of a majority will be facilitated , the best security under the
republican form, for the rights of every class of citizens, will be diminished; and
consequently. the stability a nd independence of some member of the government,
the only other security, must be proportiona lly increased. Justice is the end of government. It is the end of civ il society. It ever has been, and ever will be pursued,
until it be obtained, or until liberty be lost in the pursuit. In a society under the
forms of which the stronger faction can readily unite and oppress the weaker, anarchy may as truly be said to reign, as in a sta te of nature where the weaker individual is not secured against the violence of the stronger: And as in the latter state
even the stronger individuals are prompted by the uncertainty of their co ndition , to
submit to a government which may protect the weak as well as themselves: So in
the former state, will the more powerful factions or parties be gra dually induced by
a like motive, to wish for a government which will protect all parties, the weaker as
well as the more powerful. It can be little doubted, that if the state of Rhode Island
was separated from the confederacy, and left to itself, the insecurity of ri ghts under
the popu lar form of government within such narrow li mits, would be disp layed by
such reiterated oppressions of factious majorities, that some power altogether ind ependent of the people would soon be ca lled for by the vo ice of the very fa ction s
whose misrule had proved the necess ity of it. In the extended republic of the United
States, and among the great variety of interests, parties and sects which it em-

The Federalist No. 51

A29

braces. a coalition of a majority of the whole society could seldom take place on
any other principl es than those or justice and the general good; and there being
thus less danger to a minor rrom the will of the major party. there must be less pretext a lso, to provide for th e security of the rormer. by introducing into the government a will not dependent on the latter: or in other words. a will independent or the
society itself. It is no less certain than it is important. notwithstanding the contrary
opinions which have been entertained. that the larger the society. provided it lie
within a practicable sphere, the more duly capable it will be of self government.
And happily for the republican cause, the practicable sphere may be carried to a very
great extent. by a judicious modification and mixture or the federal principLe.
PUBLIUS

"*

PRESIDENTS AND CONGRESSES, 1789-2006

Sellate

liollsl'

Prcsid ent and
vice pres ident

Pa rty of
prcs idcnt

George Washington
john Adams

None

4 th

38
37
57
54

1 79 7-] 801

John Adams
Thomas jefferso n

Federa list

5th
6th

58 Fed
64 Fed

] 801 - 1809

Thomas Jefferson
Aa ron Bur r (to 18 0 5)
George Clinton (to 1809 )

Dem-Rep

7th
8th
9th
10 th

69
10 2
116
118

Dem-Rcp
Dem-Rep
Dem-Rep
Dem-Rep

36
39
25
24

Fed
Fed
Fed
Fed

18
25
27
28

Dem-Rep
Dem-Rep
Dem-Rep
Dem- Rep

]3 Ped

Yea r
1 789- 1 797

Congress
1st

2d
3d

Ma jori ty
party
Admin
Fed
Dem-Rep
Fed

Minority
pa rty
26
33
48
52

Opp
Dem-Rep
Fed
Dem-Rep

48 Dem-Rep
42 Dem-Rep

Majori ty
party
17
16
17
19

Admin
Fed
Fed
Fed

20 Fed
19 Fed

Min ori ty
party
9
13
13
13

Opp
lJem-Rep
Dem-Rep
Dcm-Rep

] 2 Oem-Rep
J 3 Dem-Rep
9 Ped

7 Fed
6 Fed

180 9- 18 1 7

James Madison
Gcorge Cli nton (to 18 13)
Elbridge Gerry (to 1817)

Dem-Rep

11th
12th
13th
14 th

94
108
112
11 7

Dem-Rep
I)cm-Rep
I)em-Rep
Dem-Rep

48
36
68
65

Fed
Fed
Fed
Fed

28
30
27
25

Dem-Rcp
Dcm-Rcp
lJem-Rcp
Dem-Rep

6
6
9
11

18 1 7- 1825

James Monroe
Da ni el D. Tompk in s

Dem-Rep

15th
J 6th
1 7th
] Hth

141
J 56
I 58
1H7

Dem-Rep
I)cm-Rep
I)em-Rep
lJem-Rep

42
27
25
26

Fed
Fed
Fed
Fcd

34
35
44
44

Dem-Rep
Dem-Rep
Dcm-Rcp
Dem-Rcp

10 Fed
7 Fed
4 Fed
4 Fed

1 825-1829

John Quincy Adams
John C. Ca lh oun

Na t-Rep

19 th
20th

10 5 Admin
119 jack

1829- 1837

Andrew Jackson
john C. Ca lhoun (to ] 833)
Martin Van Buren (to 18 37)

Democrat

21 st
22d
24th

1 39
141
147
145

1837- l 841

Martin Van Buren
Richard M. johnson

Democrat

25 th
26th

108 Dem
124 lJem

107 Whig
11 8 Whig

30 lJem
28 Dem

18 Wh ig
22 Wh ig

1841

William H. Harrison'
john Tyler

Whig

1841- 18 45

John Tyler
(V I' vacant)

Whig

27tb
28 th

133 Whi g
142 Dem

102 Dem
79 Whig

28 Whig
28 Whig

2 2 Dem
25 Del11

1845- 1 849

James K. Polk
George M . Dall as

Democrat

29th
30th

14 3 Dem
115 Whig

108 Dem

31 Dem
36 Dem

25 Whig
21 Whig

184 9-185 0

Zachary Taylor'
Millard Fi llmore

Whig

31st

112 Oem

109 Whig

35 Oem

25 Whig

185 0- 1853

Millard fillmore
(VI' vaca nt)

Whig

32d

140 Dem

88 Whig

35 Dem

24 Whig

] 8 53-1857

Franklin Pierce
Willi am R. King

Democrat

33d
34th

15 9 Dcm
108 Rep

71 Whig
83 Dem

38 Dem
4 0 Dem

22 Whi g
15 Rcp

23d

Dem
IJcm
i)em
Dcm

Ped
Fed
Fed
Fed

97 jack
94 Adm in

26 Admin
28 jack

20 jack
20 Ad min

74 at Rep
58 Na t Rep
53 l\nliMas
98 Whig

26
25
20
27

22 Na t Rep
2 1 at Rep
20 Na t Rep
25 Whi g

77 Whig

Dem
Dem
Dem
Dem

NOTES: On ly membcrs or two major pa rtics in Congress arc show n: omitted arc independents. members of minor parties. and vaca ncies.
Party ba lance as or bcginning or Congress.
Congrcsses in which one or both houses are controllcd by party other tha n th at of the president arc shown in color.
Du ring administration of George Washington and (in part) John Qu incy Adams. Congress was nol organ ized by fo rmal pa rties: the spl il shown is betwcen supportcrs and
opponcnts of thc adm inistration.
ABBREV IATIONS: Admin = Administration supporters: AnliMa s = Anti-Masonic: Dcm = Dcmocratic: Dcm-Rep = Dcmocratic-Rcpublican : Fed = Fcderalist:
Jack = Jacksonian Democrats: Nat Rep = Nationa l Republ ican: OPI) = Opponcnts of adm inistration : RCI) = Rcpublican: Union = Unionist: Whig = Whig.

* Died in ol'licc.

A30

A31

Pres idents and Congresses, 1789-2006
HOllse

Ma jol-ity
pa rty

Smale

Ma jority
pa rty

Min C!ri ty
party

92 Re p
92 Dem

36 Oe m
36 Oem

2 0 Rep
2 6 Rep

105 Rep
102 Rep

43 Oem
75 Oem

31 Rep
36 Rep

10 Oem
9 Oem

3 9th
4 0th

149 Union
143 Rep

42 Dem
49 Oem

42 Union
42 Rep

10 Oem
11 Oem

Republican

4 1st
42 e1
43 d
4 4th

149
1 34
1 94
169

56
52
49
45

11 Oe m
17 Oem
.19 Oem
2 9 Oem

Rutherford B. Hayes
William A. Wh eeler

Republican

45 th
46th

153 Oem
149 Oem

140 Rep
130 Rep

39 Rep
42 Oem

3 6 Oem
33 Rep

1 8 81

James A. Garfield"
Ch esler A. Ar thur

Republican

4 7th

14 7 Rep

13 5 Oem

37 Rep

3 7 Oem

188 1- 1885

Chester A. Arthur
(VP vaca nt)

Republican

48 th

197 Dem

118 Rep

38 Rep

3 6 Oem

1885- 1 88 9

Grover Cleveland
Thomas A. Hend ricks

Democra t

49th
50th

18 3 Oem
1 69 Dem

140 Rep
152 Rep

43 Rep
39 Rep

34 Oem
37 Oem

1889- 1 893

Benjamin Harrison
Levi P. Morton

Republican

5 1 st
52 d

1 66 Rep
235 Oem

1 59 Oem
88 Rep

39 Rep
47 Rep

37 Oem
3 9 Oem

1 8 9 3- 1 8 9 7

Grover Cleveland
Adl a i E. Stevenson

Democrat

53 d
54th

2 1 8 Oem
244 Rep

1 27 Rep
105 Oem

44 Oem
43 Rep

3 8 Rep
39 Oem

1897- 1901

William McKinley·
Ga rret A. Il obart (to 1 90l )
Th eodore Roosevelt (19 01 )

Repu blica n

55 th
56th

204 Rep
185 Rep

1 13 Oem
1 63 Oem

47 Rep
53 Rep

34 Dem
2 6 Oem

1 9 01- 1 909

Theodore Roosevelt
(VI' vaca n t. 19 01 - 1905)
Charles W. Fa irbanks
(19 0 5- 19 0 9)

Republican

57th
58 th
59 th
60th

1 97
208
250
222

l SI Oem
178 Oem
136 Oem
164 Oem

55
57
57
61

31
33
33
31

19 09- 1 913

Willi ...n Howard Taft
Ja mes S. Sherma n

Republica n

6 1st
62d

219 Rep
228 Oem

172 Oe m
161 Rep

61 Rep
51 Rep

32 Oem
4 1 Dem

1 913-1 92 1

Woodrow Wilson
Thom as R_Marshall

Democrat

63 d
64th
65 th
66th

291 Dem
23 0 Oem
21 6 Oem
240 Rep

1 27
1 96
21 0
190

51
56
53
49

44
40
42
47

1 92 1- 1 923

Warren G. Harding"
Calvin Coolidge

Republican

67th

3 01 Rep

13 1 Oem

59 Rep

3 7 Oem

1 923-1 929

Calvin Coolidge
(V P vacant. 1923-1925)
Ch a rles G. Da wes
(1 925- 192 9 )

Republican

68 th
69 th
70th

225 Rep
247 Rep
237 Rep

2 0 5 Oem
183 Dem
195 Dem

51 Rep
56 Rep
49 Rep

43 Oem
3 9 Dem
4 6 Dem

1 929- 1933

Herbert Hoover
Ch arles Curti s

Repub li can

71 st
72d

267 Rep
220 Dem

1 67 Dem
214 Rep

56 Rep
48 Rep

3 9 Oem
4 7 lJem

1933- 1 945

Franklin O. Roosevelt"
John N. Ga rner
(1 933- 1941)
Il en ry A. Wa ll ace
(194 1- 1945)
I-la rry S Trum a n (1945)

Oemocra t

73 d
74th
75 th
76 th
77th
78th

3 10
319
33 1
26 1
268
2 18

Oem
Oem
Oem
Oem
Oem
Ocm

11 7
103
89
164
1 62
20 8

Rep
Re p
Rep
Rep
Re p
Re p

60
69
76
69
66
58

Oem
Oem
Oem
Oem
De m
Dem

35
25
J6
23
28
37

Rep
Hep
Rep
Rep
Rep
Rep

J 945- 19 53

Harry S Truman
(VI' vaca nt. 1945- 1949)
Alben W. Barkley
(1949- 1953)

Oemocra t

79 th
SOth

242
245
263
234

Dcm
Rep
Oem
Oem

190
188
171
199

Rep
Oem
Rep
Rep

56
51
54
49

Oem
Rep
Dem
Dem

38
45
42
47

Rep
Oem
Rep
Rep

President and
vice pres ident

Party or
president

1 857- 1861

James Buchanan
John C. I3reckinridge

Democrat

35 th
36th

11 8 Dem
]]4 Rep

1861-1865

Abraham Lincoln·
Hann iba ill a m lin (to 18(5)
Andrew Jo hn son (1865)

Republi ca n

37 th
38th

1865- 1 869

Andrew Johnson
(VI' vaca nt)

Republi can

1869-1877

Iysses S. Grant
Schuy ler Co ll'a x (to 1873)
Henry Wilso n (to 1877)

1877-1 88 1

Yea r

• Died ill olliec.

Congress

HI sl
82 e1

Rep
Rep
Rep
Oem

Rep
Rep
Rep
Rep

Min ority
pa rty

63
1 04
92
109

Dem
Dem
Dem
Rep

Rep
Rep
Rep
Oem

Rep
Rep
Rep
Rep

Rep
Rep
Rep
Rep

Dem
Oem
Oem
Rep

Oem
Oem
Oem
Oem

Rep
Rep
Rep
Oem

Appendix

A 32

Senate

House

President and
vice president

Pa rty of
president

1953- 1961

Dw igh t D. Eisenhowe r
Ri cha rd M. ixon

Republica n

83d
84th
85th
86th

22 1
232
233
283

1961- 1963

John E Ke nne d y'
Ly ndon H. Johnson

Democrat

87th

263 Oem

1 74 Rep

65 Oem

35 Rep

1963- 1969

Lyndon B. Johnson
(V P vaca nt. 196 3- 1965)
Hubert H. Humphrey
(1965- 1969)

Democra t

88th
8 9th
90th

258 Oem
295 Oem
247 Oem

1 77 Rep
140 Rep
187 Rep

67 Oem
68 Oem
64 Oem

33 Rep
32 Rep
36 Rep

1969- 19 74

Richard M. Nixont
Spiro T. Agnewtt
Gera ld R. Ford§

Republican

91st
92d

243 Oem
254 Oem

192 Rep
180 Rep

57 Dem
54 Oem

43 Rep
44 Rep

1974- 19 77

Gerald R. Ford
Nelson A. Rockereller§

Rep u blican

93d
94th

239 Oem
29 1 Dem

192 Rep
144 Rep

56 Dem
60 Dem

42 Rep
37 Rep

1977- 198 1

Jimmy Car ter
Wa lter Monda le

Democrat

95th
9 6 th

292 Oem
276 Oem

143 Rep
157 Rep

61 Oem
58 Oem

38 Rep
4 1 Rep

1981- 1989

Rona ld Reagan
George Bush

Republica n

97th
98 th
9 9th
100tb

243
269
253
257

53
54
53
54

46
46
47
46

1989- 199 3

George Bu sh
Dan Quay le

Republican

10Ist
t02d

262 Dem
267 Oem

173 Rep
167 Rep

199 3-2000

Bill Clinton
Albert Gore. Jr.

Democrat

103d
104 th
10 5th
106th

258
23 0
228
223

1 76
204
20 6
2 11

2000- 2009

Geor ge W. Bus h
Dick Cheney

Republica n

107tb
10 8th
109 th

220 Rep
22 9 Rep
233 Rep

Year

' Died in office.

t Resigncd from the presidency.

Congress

Ma jo rity
pa rty

ttResigned from the vice presidency.

Rep
Oem
Oem
Oem

Dem
Oem
Oem
Oem

Oem
Rep
Rep
Re p

Minority
party

Ma jority
pa rty

Min ority
pa rty

21 1
203
200
153

48
48
49
64

47
47
47
34

192
165
182
]78

Oem
Rep
Rep
Rep

Rep
Rep
Rep
Rep

Rep
LJem
Oem
Oem

2 1 5 Oem
204 Oem
206 Oem

§Appointcd vice president.

Rep
Oem
Oem
Oem

Rep
Rep
Rep
Oem

55 Oem
56 Oem
57
53
55
54

Oem
Rep
Rep
Re p

50 Rep
51 Rep
55 Rep

Oem
Rep
Rep
Rep

Oem
LJem
Oem
Rep

45 Rep
44 Rep
43
47
45
46

Rep
Oem
Oem
LJem

50 Oem
48 Oem
44 LJem

*

GLOSSARY

activist approach The view that judges should di scern th e genera l principles underlyin g laws or th e Constitut ion and apply
them to modern circumstances. (16)
activists People who tend to partici pate in all form s of politi cs. (8)
ad hoc structure Several subordinates. cabin et officers. a nd committees report directly to the president on different mallers.
(14)

adversarial press Th e tendency of the nati ona l medi a to be suspiciou s of offi cials and eager to reveal unfla tterin g stories about
them. (12)
affirmative action Progra ms designed to increase minority participation in so me in stitution (bu sinesses. schools. labor unio ns.
or government agencies) by taking positive steps to appoint
more min ority-group members. (Ii)
amendment A new prov ision in th e Constitution that has been
ratifi ed by the sta tes. (2)
amicus curiae A brief su bmitted by a "frie nd of t he court. " (16)
ntifederalists Those who fa vor a weaker national government.

J
J

Jappr~~riation

A legisla ti ve gra nt of mon ey to finan ce a government progra m or age ncy. (15)
Articles of Confederation A weak co nstituti on that governed
America durin g th e Revo lutionary Wa r. (2)
assistance programs A government program finan ced by genera l income taxes that provides benefits to poor ci tizens without
requirin g contribution from them. (19)
Australian ballot A gove rnm e nt-printed ba ll ot of unifo rm
dimensions to be cast in secret that ma ny states adopted around
1890 to reduce voting fraud associa ted with party-printed bal J;>ts cast in public. (8)
authority Th e ri ght to use power. (1 )
authorization legislation Legislative permiss ion to begi n or continu e a government progra m or agency. (15)

background A publi c ol'f1ci al's statement to a reporter that is
give n on conditio n t hat the off1 cial not be n a med. (12 )
benefit A satisfa ction th at people beli eve they will enjoy if a policy
is adopted . (1 7)
bicameral legislature A lawmakin g body made up of two chambers or parts. (1 3)
bill of attainder A law that decla res a perso n . without a trial. to
\
be guilty of a crime. (2)
....j Bill of Rights
First ten a mendments to th e Constitution. (2)
\ bipolar world A politica l lan dscape with t wo superpowers. (2 0 )
'-.,j blanket primary
A primary election in which each voter may
\
vote for ca ndid ates from both parties. (J 0)
~ block grants Money from th e natio na l government that states
can spend within broad guidelin es determin ed by Wa shin gton.
(3)
blog A series. or log. of di scuss ion items on a pa ge of th e World
Wid e Web. (12)
brief A written statement by an a ttorn ey that summarizes a case
J a nd the laws and rulin gs th at support it. (16)
"J'udget A document th at states ta x collections. spending levels.
and th e a llocation of spending among purposes. (18)

J

budget resolution A con gress iona l decision that states th e maximum a mount of mon ey the government should spend . (1. 8)
,~ bully pulpit
The president's Li se of his presti ge a nd visibility to
\
guide or enthu se the American public. (14)
\J bureaucracy A large. co mpl ex orga ni za ti o n co mposed of
appO inted offi cia ls. (15)
bureaucratic view View that th e govern ment is dominated by
appointed off1 cials. (1)

I

J

cabinet Th e hea ds of the f1fteen executive bra nch depa rt ments of
th e federa l governm ent. (14)
categorical grants Federa l grants for specific purposes. such as
buildin g an airport. (3)
caucus A meetin g of pa rty members to select delegates ba ckin g
one or anoth er prim a ry ca ndidates. (9. 10. ] 3)
charitable choice
ame given to four federal laws passed in the
late ] 990s specifyin g th e co ndition s under which nonprofit
reli gious orga nizatio ns cou ld compete to admini ster certa in
social servi ce deli.very a nd welfare programs. (J 9)
checks and balances Au thority shared by three bra nches of government.(2)
circular structure Several of th e presid ent's assista nts repor t
dir~ct ly to him. (1. 4)
civic competence A belief that one can affect governme nt policies. (4)
civic duty A beli ef that one has a n obli gat ion to pa rtici pat e in
civic and political affairs. (4)
ivil disobedience Opposing a law one co nsi ders unju st by
peacefully disobeyin g it a nd accepti ng t he resulta nt puni shment. (Ii)
civil rights The ri ghts of peopl e to be treated with out unreaso nab le or un constituti on al differences. (6)
class consciousness A belief that you are a member of a n economic grou p whose interests a re opposed to people in other
such groups. (4)
class-action s uit A case brou ght by someone to help him or her
I
and al l others wh o a re Simil a rly situated. (J 6)
v clear-and-present-danger test Law should not punish speec h
unless th ere wa s a clear a nd prese nt danger of prodU Cing
I harmful acti ons. (5)
'V client politics A policy in whic h one small group benefits and
almost everybody pays. (1 7. J 9)
- jclosed primary A prim ary electi on in whic h voting is limited to
already registered party members. (J 0 )
losed rule An order from th e Hou se Rul es Committee that sets a
time limit on debate; forbid s a bill from bein g a me nded on th e
floor. (1 3)
cloture rule A rule used by the Senate to end or limi t debate. (13)
coalitiOn An alliance of faction s. (2)
coattails The a lleged tendency of ca ndid ates to win more votes in
an election because of th e prese nce at th e top of the ti cket of a
better-known candidate. such as the president. (10)
com mand-and-control strategy A strategy to improve air a nd
water qu ality. involving the settin g of d a iled polluti on standards and rules. (21)

-J

J

J

J
J

Gl

G2

J

Glossary

committee clearance The abili ty of a congress ion a l committee
to review and approve certain agency decisions in advance and
without pa ss in g a law. (15 )
competitive service The governme nt offices to which peop le are
appo inted o n the ba sis of merit. as ascertain ed by a written
exa m or by applying certain selecti on criteria. (15)
'oncurrent powers Powers shared by the na tion a l and state
governme nts. (2)
concurrent resolution An ex press ion of opini on without th e
force of law that requires the approval of both th e House and
the Senate. but not the pres ident. (13)
concurring opinion A signed opinion in whi ch one or more
members agree witb tbe majority view but for diffe rent reaso ns.
(16)
condjtions of aid Terms set by tbe natio nal governm ent that
states must meet if tb ey are to receive certain federal fund s. (3)
conference committees A jo int co mmittee appointed to resolve
differences in tbe Senate a nd Ho use version s of tbe sa me bill.

J

J

(13)

congressional campaign committee A party committee in
Co ngress tbat provides fund s to members and would-be members. (9)
conservative coalition An allian ce between Republican a nd
conservative Democrats. (13)
Constitutional Convention Meetin g in Pbiladelphia in 17 87
that produ ced a new con stituti on. (2)
constitutional court A federal court authorized by Ar ticle III of
th e Constitution that keeps judges in office during good be havior an d prevents tb eir sa laries from being redu ced. Th ey are th e
Su preme Co urt (created by the Co nstitution) and appell a te and
di stri ct co urts created by Congress. (J 6)
containment 'rhe belief that the United States should resist th e
expa nsion of aggressive nati ons, especially the fo rm er Sov iet
Union. (20)
cost A burden that people beli eve they mu st bear if a policy is
enacted. (J 7)
cost overruns When the mon ey actually paid to milita ry suppliers exceeds the estim ated costs. (2 0)
courts of appeals Federa l co urts that hear appeals fro m di strict
courts: no trial s. (16)
critical or realignment period Periods when a major, lasting
shift occurs in th e popular coalitio n supportin g one or both parties. (9)
J e facto segregation Ra cia l seg rega tion that occu rs in schools.
not as a result of the law. but as a resu lt of pattern s of resid ential settlement. (6)
deficit What occurs when th e government in one year spend s
more money than it takes in from taxes. (18)
j de jure segregation Racia l segrega tion t hat is required by law.

J

(6)

democracy The rule of t be many. (1)
devolution The effort to transfer responsibility lor many publi c
programs and services from th e fed eral governme nt to th e
states. (3)
direct or particilJatory democracy A governm ent in whi ch a ll
or most eitize ns participate directly. (1)
discharge petition A device by wh ich any member of th e House.
after a committee bas had the bill for thirty days. may petiti on
to have it brought to the noor. (1 3)

J

discretionary authority Th e extent to which a ppointed burea ucrats ca n choose courses of action and make poliCies that are
not spelled out in advance by la ws. (15 )
disengagement The belief that th e United States was harmed by
its war in Vi etnam and so sho uld avo id supposedly simil a r
events. (2 0)
dissenting opinion A signed op inion in whi ch on e or more justi ces di sagree with the majority view. (16)
district courts The lowest federa l co urts: fed eral trials ca n be held
only here. (16)
diversity cases Cases involvin g citizens of different states who
can bring suit in federa l cou rts. (16)
divided government On e party co ntrol s th e White Hou se
a nd anoth er pa rty co ntrol s o ne o r both hou ses of Co ngress.
(14)

mvision vote A co ngress ional voting procedure in whic h members stand and a re co unted. (1 3)
double-tr'lcking A procedure to keep th e Senate go in g during a
filibu ster in which the di sputed bill is shelved temporarily so
that the Senate can get on with oth er bu sin ess. (l3)
dual federalism Doctrine holdin g that the nationa l government
is supreme in its sphere. the states are supreme in theirs , and
th e two sph eres should be kept separate. (3)
due process of 1.lw Denies the government tb e ri ght. without
du e process, to deprive peo pl e of li fe. liberty. and property. (5)

Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) A provision of a ]9 75 law
that entitl es working famili es with children to reccive money
from the government if their total income is below a certain
level. Th e prog ram was expa nded in the ea rly 1990s. (19 )
economic planning The belief that govern ment plans. such as
wage and price controls or the direction of investment. ca n
improve tb e economy. (18)
electoral college The people chosen to cast each state's votes in a
pres idential election. Ea ch state can cast one electora l vote for
each senator and representative it has. Th e District of Columbi a
has three electoral votes. even though it c;mnot elect a representa tive or senator. (14)
elite Perso ns who possess a di sproportion ale share of some valued
resource. like mon ey or power. ( I . 7)
entitlements A cla im for govcrnme nt fund s that cannot be
chan ged without violati ng the rights of lhe claimant. (18)
entrepreneurial politics A pol icy in whic h a lmost everybody
ben efits and a small gro up pays the cost. (1 7)
V enumerated powers Powers given to the national government
a lon e. (2)
environmental impact statement A report required by federal
law thal assesses th e poss ible effect of a project on t he e nvironment if th e project is subsidi zed in whole or part by federa l
fund s. (2 1)
.... e(IUal protection of the law A standard of equa l trea tment that
mu st be observed by the government. (5)
equal time rule An FCC rule that if a broadcaster sells time to one
cand idate. it mu st sell equa l time to other ca ndidates. (12 )
e(IUality of OIJportumty Giving people an equal chance to succeed. (6)
equality of result Making certa in that people ac hieve the sa me
/
res ult. (6)
V establishment clause First. Amendm ent ban o n laws "respectin g
a n estab lishment of reli gion." (5)

J
J

I

J

J

Glossary

J ex post facto law

A law that makes a n act crim ina l althou gh the
act was lega l when it was comm itted. (2)
exclusionary rule Improperly ga th ered ev ide nce may not be
introdu ced in a crim ina l tr ia l. (5)
{ exit polls Po lls based on interviews co ndu cted on Electio n Day
w ith ra nd om ly selected voters. (7)
exter nal effi cacy The willin gness of th e sta te to respon d to the
citizenry. (4)

fa ction A group with a distinct politi ca l interest. (2)
feature stories Media stories about events th at. thou gh pub lic.
are not regu la rly covered by repor ters. (12)
j fe derali sm Governmen t a uth ority shared by na tio na l and state
govern me nts. (2)
J ede rali sts Those who favor a stronger nationa l govern ment. (2)
fed eral-question cases Cases co ncernin g the Constitutio n. feden d laws. or trea ties. (H i)
fee shiftin g A ru le t hat a ll ows a pla inti ff to recover costs from the
defend ant if th e pla intiff win s. (16)
~ filibuster An altemptto defea t a bill in th e Senate by ta lkin g indefinitely. thu s preventin g the Senate from ta kin g a cti on to th e bill.

J

fi scal policy Ma na gin g the eco nomy by th e usc of tax and spe ndin g laws. (18)
lisca l year For the federal governm en t. Octobe r 1 th rou gh th e fo llawing Septem ber 30. (18)
527 organizations Orga niza tion s that. under secti on 52 7 of th e
Interna l Reven ue Code. ra ise a nd spe nd mon ey to adva nce
/
pol itica l ca uses. (10)
V franking privilege The ab il ity of membcrs to m a ill eltcrs to their
co nstitu e nts frce of c harge by substitutin g thc ir facs im ile signature for postage. (13)
freedom of expression Right of people to spca k. publis h. a nd
assemble. (5)
freedom of re ligion People shall be free to exercise th eir reli gio n.
an d governmcnt may not establish a reli gion. (5)
free-exercise clause First Amcndm ent rcq uiremcnt that law
cann ot preve nt free exerc ise of reli gion. (5)

J

f

-J

J

.~

ideological interest groups Po litica l organ iza ti ons th at attract
mcmbers by appea lin g to their po litical convictions or pr in ci ples. (ll )
ideological party A party that va lues prin cip led sta nds on iss ues
above a ll else. (9)
impeachme nt
Charges against a presiden t approved by a ma jority of th e House of Representatives. (14)
in forma pauperis A method whereby a poor person ca n have hi s
or her case hea rd in fede ral court w ithout charge. (16)
incentive Somethin g o f va lue one ca nnot get without joinin g an
orga ni za ti on . (11)
income strategy A pol icy givin g poor people money to help li ft
th em out of poverty. (19)
in c umben t The perso n a lready holdin g an elective ofi1ce. (10)
independent expe nditures Spe ndin g by politica l action committees. co rporati ons. or labor union s th a t is done to help a
party or ca ndidate but is done independently of them. (10)
initiative Process t hat permits vote rs to put legislative measu res
dircctly o n th e ba llot. (3)
insider stories Media stories abo u t evcnts th a t arc not usua lly
made pub lic. (1 2)
in suran ce progra m A se ll~ fln a n ci n g governm ent progra m based
on contr ibutions that prov ide be nelits to un c mployed or retired
persons. (19)
interest group An orga nizatio n of pcople sha rin g a comm on
intercst or goal tha t seeks to influ ence th c makin g of publi c
po li cy. (17)
in terest group politics A policy in whi ch one sma ll group benefits an d another small gro up pays . (17)
internal efli cacy 'fh e a bility to undcrstan d an d ta kc pa rt in po li ti cs. (4)
iron triangl e A close re lati onship between a n agency. a co ngresSiona l co mmittee. and an interest grou p. (15)
isolationism The opini on tha t th e United States sho uld withdraw
from wor ld a ffa irs. (20)
issue n etworl{ A network of people in Washin gton. D. C.-ba sed
interest groups. on congressiona l sta ffs. in uni ver sities a nd
think tanks. and in th e ma ss med ia. w ho regul arly discuss and
advoca te pub li c poli cies. (15)

J

.J ge nder

gap Differe n ce in po li t ica l views betwee n mcn and
women. (7)
general election An electi on held to c hoosc whic h ca ndidate w ill
hold o rn ce. (10)
gerrymandering Draw in g th e bou nda ries of leg islati ve districts
in biza rrc or unu sual s ha pes to favo r o ne party. (10)
gold plating The ten dency of Pentagon officia ls to ask weapon s
contra ctors to meet excess ively hi gh requ irements. (20)
good-faith eXCe l)tion An error in gatherin g evidence sufficiently
minor that it may be used in a tria l. (5)
grandfather clause A cla use in reg istration laws a ll ow in g people
who do not meet registration requ ircme nts to vote if th ey or
their ancestors had voted before 1867. (8 )
grants-in-aid Money give n by th e nati onal government to th e
sta tes. (3)
Great Compromise Plan to have a popul arly e lected House ba sed
on state population and a state-selected Sena te. with two members for each state. (2)
gridlock The inabil ity of the govern me nt to act beca use riva l parties control d ifferent pa rts of the govern ment. (14)
gross domestic product The total of a ll good s and services produ ced in th e econ omy during a given year. (18)

habeas corpus An ord er to prod uce a n a rrcsted person before a
judge. (2)
human rights The vi ew tbat we s hou ld try to improve th e li ves of
peop le in other countri es. (20)

J

(13)

(

G3

joint commi ttees Committees o n whi ch both senators and represen tatives ser ve. (13)
joint resolution A fo rma l ex press io n of co ng ressio nal opi ni on
that mu st be approved by both houses of Co ngress a nd by the
president: constituti o na l amendm ents nced not be Signed by
t he president. (13)
judicial revi ew Th e power of th e co urts to declare laws u nco nstitutiona l. (2. 16)

J
J

Keynesianism The belief the governm en t mu st mana ge th e eco nomy by spending more money when in a recess ion and c uttin g
spend in g when there is inflatio n. (18)

J laissez-I~lire

An econom ic t heory that governm ent sho uld not
reg ul a te or interfere w itb commerce. (1 5)

Glossary

G4

.J lame du ck

J
.J
J

J

J

A person still in office after he or she ha s lost a bid for
reelection. (14)
legislative courts Co urts created by Congress for specia lized purposes whose judges do not enjoy the protectio ns of Art icle rrr of
the Co nstitution . (16)
legislati ve ve to The authority of Congress to block a presidenti a l
action after it ha s taken pl ace. The Supreme Cour t has held that
Cong ress does not have th is power. (J 4. 1 5)
legitima cy Political auth ority con ferred by law or by a state or
nationa l constitution. (1)
libe l Writing that fa lsely injures a noth er person. (5)
line-item veto An executive 's a bility to block a particular provi sion in a bill passed by th e legislature. (2. 14)
literacy test A requirement that citizens pa ss a lit era cy test in
order to register to vote. (S)
litmu s test An examination of the po li tica l id eo logy of a nominated judge. (16)
load ed language Words that imply a va lu e judgment. used to
persuade a read er without having made a ser ious argument.
(12)

Jnational convention

A meeting of party delegates held every
four years. (9)
J national debt The total deficit from th e I1rst presidency down to
th e prese nt. (1 S)
J "necessary and proper" clause Section of the Co nstituti on
a llowing Cong ress to pa ss a ll laws "necessa ry and proper" to its
duti es. and wh ich has permitted Co ngress to exercise powers
not specil1ca lly given to it (enumerated ) by the Co nstitution . (3)
lew Jersey Plan Proposa l to create a weak nationa l government .

I

J

A standard of right or proper co ndu ct. (7)
'\.} nullifi ca tion Th e doctrin e that a sta te can declare null a nd vo id a
federal law that. in the slat e's op inio n. vio lates the Co nstitution.
(3)

-J

majoritarian politics A pol icy in whi ch a lm ost everybody benefi ts and a lmost everybody pays . (17. 19 )
"-.\ majori ty leader Th e leg islative leader elected by party members
holding th e ma jority of seats in the House or th e Senate. (1 3)
malapportionment Drawing th e bound a ri es of legis lative dis/
triets so t ha t they are unequal in popu la tion. ( 10)
-..v manda tes Terms set by the nati onal government that states mu st
meet whether or not they accept fed era l gra nts. (3)
marginal districts Political di stricts in wh ich ca ndidat es elected
to the Hou se of Representatives win in close el ection s. typi ca lly
by less than 55 percent of the vote. (13)
Marxist view View t hat t he governm ent is dominated by capital ists. (J )
material incentives Money or thin gs va lued in mon etary term s.
I
(lI )
\J means test An in come qua li fi cation program that determin es
whet her on e is eli gible for be nefi ts und er governm ent program s
reserved for lower- income gro u ps. (1 9)
military-industrial complex An a lleged a lliance between mi li tary leaders and corporate lea ders. (2 0)
minority lea de r The legisla tive lea der elected by pa rty members
holdin g a minority of sea ts in the House or the Senate. (13)
monetarism The belief that inl1 ation occurs when too mu ch
. If money is chaSin g too few goods. (18)
v monetary policy Managin g th e eco nomy by a ltering the supply
of mon ey and interest rates. (18 )
mugwumps or progressives Republi ca n party fa ctio n of th e
1 S90s to the 1910s co mposed of reformers who opposed
patronage. (9)
multiple referra l A congress ional process whereby a bi ll may be
referred to severa l committees. (13)

J

J

name -request job A job that is fill ed by a perso n whom an
agency has a lready id en tified. (15)
national chairman Day-to-day party manager elected by th e
. /
na tiona l committee. (9)
~ national committee
Delega tes who run party affa irs betwee n
nationa l conve ntions. (9)

J

office-bloc ballot A ba ll ot listing a ll ca ndidates for a given office
undcr the name of that offlcc: also ca ll ed a "Massachusetts"
ba ll ot. (9)
.o pen primary A prim a ry election in which voters may choose in
whi ch part y to vote as th ey enter the po ll ing place. (10)
open rul e An o rder from th e House Rules Committee that permits
a bill to be amended on the 11 00r. (13)
opinion of th e court A signed opini on of a majority of the
Supreme Co urt. (16)
orthodox A beli ef that mora li ty and religion ought to be of decisive import ance. (4)

J

logrolling A legislator supports a proposa l favored by another in
return for support of his or hers. (17)

r

(2)

I norm

party polarization A vote in which a majority of Democrati c legislato rs oppose a majori ty of Repub li ca n legislators. (1 3)
J'party-column ballot A ba ll ot listing a ll ca ndidates of a given
party together under the name of that party: also ca lled a n
"Ind iana" ballot. (9)
per curiam opinion A bri ef. un signed co urt opinion . (16)
personal following The politica l support provided to a ca ndidate
on th e basis of persona l popu larity and networks. (9)
plaintiff The party that initi ates a lawsuit. (1 Ii)
pluralist "iew The belief that competition among a ll affect.ed
int erests shapes public poli cy. (1)
plurality system An electoral system in wbich th e winner is
th e person who gets th e most votes. eve n if he or she does
/
not rece ive a maj ority: used in a lmost a ll American elections. (9)
\q' pocket veto A bi ll fail s to become la w beca use the president d id
not sign it w ithin ten days before Con gress adjourns . (14)
police powe r State power to enact laws promoting bealth. sa fety.
and morals. (3. 6)
policy e ntre pre n e urs Act ivists in or out of government who pull
together a polilica l majority on be half of unorganized interests.

J

V

r

( 17)

'\lpolitical action committee (PAC) A committee set up by a co rpor<ltion. labor union. or interest group that rai ses and spend s
campa ign money from voluntary donations. (10)
olitical agenda Issues tbat people believe require governmenta l
a ction . (1 7)
political cue A signal tellin g a legislator what va lu es are at stake
in a vote. and h ow that iss ue fits into hi s or her ow n po liti ca l
views on party agenda. (11 )
political c ulture A coherent way of thinking about how po li ti cs
and government ought to be ca rri ed out. (4)
political efficacy A beli ef that you ca n take part in po litics (interna l efficacy) or that the government will respond to th e citizenry (ex terna l e ffi cacy). (4)

Glossary
v1JOlitical e li tes Perso ns with a di sproporti onate s ha re of po litica l
power. (7)
political ideology A more or less co nsisten t set of beliefs a bo ut
wha t policies governm ent ou ght to pursue. (7)
political machine A party orga n ization th a t recr uits members by
dispensin g pa tTona ge. (9)
political party A group th a t seeks to el ect ca ndidates to pub lic
office. (9)
political question An iss ue th e Supreme Court will a ll ow th e
execu tive a nd legisla tive bra nches decide. ( 16)
political socialization Process by whic h backg ro und tra its inllu en ce one's political vi ews. (7)
poll A survey of publi c opin io n. (7)
poll tax A requirement tha t ci tizens pay a ta x in order to register
to vote. (8)
pork-barrel legislation Leg isla ti on th a t gives ta n gib le benefits to
co nsti tue nts in several districts or sta tes in th e h ope of winnin g
th eir votes in return . (l3 . 17)
position issues An iss ue a bout whi ch th e pub li c is divided a nd
ri va l ca ndid a tes or politi ca l parties a dopt different policy positio ns. (J 0 )
power The ab ility of one person to get a nother perso n to act in
acco rd a nce with the I1 rst perso n's intentions. (1)
I)ower elite view Vi ew that the governm en t is dominated by a fe w
top lea ders. most of wh om a re outside of governm ent. (1)
Ilrimary election An electi on held to choose ca ndidates fo r ol'i1 ce.

J

J
J

J

(10)

/
.;

(
'\j

prior restrai nt Censorship of a publicatio n. (5)
private bill A legislative bill th at deals only w ith spec ifi c. priva te.
personal, or local matters. (13)
probable cause Reasonabl e ca use for issuin g a sea rc h wa rra nt or
makin g an arrest; more th a n mere suspi cion . (5)
process regulation Rul es governin g co mm e rc ia l acti viti es
designed to improve consum er. wo rker. or enviro nm enta l conditi ons. Also called social regulatioll. (1 7)
progressive A belief th a t person a l freedom a nd so lvin g socia l
prob lems a re more important t han reli gion . (4)
prospective voting Votin g l'or a candidate beca nse yo u favor hi s
or ber ideas fo r ha ndlin g issues. (l 0)
public bill A legisla ti ve bill th a t dea ls with matters of general concern. (13)
public opinion How peopl e thin k or feel about particular things. (7)
public-interest lobby A po liti ca l organiza tion whose goals will
prin c ipa lly be nefit n onmembers. (11)
purposive incentive A benefit t ha t comes fro m ser ving a cau se
or prin ciple. ( 11 )
pyra mid structure A preside nt's subordin a tes report to him
through a clea r cha in of comm a nd headed by a chief of sta ff: (J 4)

J

.r

"fJ

quorum Th e minimum number of members who mu st be present
l'or bu sin ess to be co ndu cted in Con gress. (13)
quorum call A roll ca ll in eit her h ouse of Con gress to see wheth er
the min imu m number of representa tives req uired to co ndu ct
bu sin ess is present. (J 3)
random sample Method of selectin g from a popu la tion in whic h
each person has an equ a l probability o f bein g selected. (7)
ratings Assessments of a representa tive's votin g record on iss ues
im por ta n t to a n interest g roup. (11 )

G5

Heaganomics The beli ef that a combin a ti on of mon eta ri sm.
lower federal spendin g. a nd supply-sid e eco nomics w ill stimu la te the eco nomy. (18)
recall Procedure whereby voters can remove a n elected ol'i1cia l
from offi ce. (3)
red tape Compl ex burea ucra ti c rules a nd procedu res that mu st be
foll owed to get som ethin g done. (15 )
\keferendum Procedure enablin g voters to re ject a meas ure passed
by the legislat ure. (3)
registered voters Peopl e wh o a re reg istered to vote. (8)
remedy A judicia l order enl'orcin g a ri ght or redressin g a wron g.

J

.J

(1 6)

represent:ltive de mocracy A governm ent in which lead ers
make dccisions by winnin g a co mpetitive stru ggle fa r th e popu la r vote. (1)
~republic A governmen t in whi ch elected representatives make the
decisions. (2)
""reserved powers Powers given to the sta te government alon e. (2)
restrictive rule An ord er from th e Ho use Ru les Committee th a t
permits certa in kind s of a mendments bu t not ot hers to be m ade
in to a bill on th e 1100r. (13)
retrospective voting Votin g fo r a ca ndid ate beca use you like his
or her past acti ons in ol'i1ce. (10)
reverse discrimination Us in g race or sex to give prefere nti a l
treatm en tto so me people. (6)
revenue sharing Federa l sharing of a fixed percentage of its revenu es w ith th e sta tes. (3)
roll-call vote A con gressiona l voting procedure th a t co nsists o f
members a nswerin g "yea" or "nay " to t heir na mes. (13)
routine stories Media stories abo ut events th a t a re regul a rly covered by reporters. (1 2)
runoff primary A second primary electi on held when no ca ndi da te win s a majority of the votes in th e I1 rst prim a ry. (10)

J

J

~afe districts

Districts in wh ich in cumbents w in by ma rgin s of 55
percent or more. (1 3)
..!sampling e rror The difference betwee n th e results of ra ndom
samp les ta ken a t th e sa me tim c. (7)
0 search warrant A judge's ord er a uth orizin g a search . (5)
"';e lect committees Con gressiona l committees appointed for a
limi ted tim e a nd pu r pose. (13)
selective attention Pay ing a tte ntion only to those news stories
with whi ch o ne a lrea dy agrees. (12)
~elective incorporation Co urt cases that apply Bill of Ri ghts to
)
sta tes. (5)
\j'separate-but-e(lual doctrine The doctrine established in Pless!1
II. Fergl/ soll (1896) that Afri ca n America ns could consti tuti ona lly be kept in sepa rate but equal facilities. (6)
J separation of I)OwerS Constitutional auth ori ty is sha red by
three clil'le re nt bran ches of government. (2)
sequential referral A con gress ional process by whi ch a Speaker
may send a bill to a seco nd committee after t he fi rst is fini shed
actin g. ( 13)
seq uester Automatic spendin g cu ts. (18)
service strategy A policy providin g poor peopl e with edu ca ti on
and job training to help li ft th em out of poverty. (19)
Shays's Rebellion A 1 787 rebellion in whi ch ex- Revo lutiona ry
Wa r soldiers attempted to prevent foreclosures of far ms as a
resul t of hi gh interest rates a nd taxes . (2)

V

G6

Glossary

s imple resolution An exp ress ion of opin ion eith er in th e
House or Senate to settl e procedura l matters in eith er body.
(13)

social movem e n t A widely shared demand for chan ge in some
aspect of the social or politica l order. (J 1)
soft mon ey Funds obtained by poli tica l parties that are spent on
party activities. such as get-out-the-vote drives. but not on
beha lf of a speci fi c ca ndidate. (10)
solidary incen tives The social rewa rds (sense of pleasure. status.
or compan ionship) that lead people to join political orga niza tion s. (9. ] 1)
sophomore s urge An in crease in the votes congressiona l ca nd idates usua lly get when th ey first run for reelection. (10)
sound bite A radio or v ideo clip of someone speaking. (12 )
sovere ign immuni ty The rule that a citizen ca nnot sue th e gov/
ernment without the government's consent. (16)
Vspli t ticket Voting for ca ndid ates of different parties for various
orrices in the sa me election . (9)
sponsored party A loca l or state poli tica l party that is largely su pported by anoth er orga niza ti on in the commun ity. (9)
sta ndin g A lega l rule statin g who is a uthorized to start a lawsu it.

J

-J symbolic speech

telle r vote A congressional voting procedure in which members pass
between two tellers. the "yeas" first and the "nays" second. (J 3)
Vtrial balloon Informal'ion leaked to the media to test pub lic reaction to a possible po licy. (] 2)
trust fund s Funds for government programs that are co ll ected
and spent outside the regu la r government bud get. (15)
Jtwo-party system An electoral system with two domin ant pa rties
th at compete in nationa l elections. (9)
umlli e nable A human ri ght based on nature or God . (2)
unilie d gove rnm e n t The sa me party controls the White Hou se
and both hou ses of Co ngress. (14)
unipola r world A politica l landscape with one su perpower. (2 0)

J.

(16)

J standing committees

Perman ently established legislative committees that consider and a re responsible for legislation within
/
a certa in subject area. (J 3)
'<...j s ta re decisis "Let the decision stand ." or a ll owi ng prior rulin gs to
control th e current case. (16)
traigh t ticket Voting for ca nd idates who are all of th e sa me
party. (9)
strict scrutiny A Supreme Court test to see if a law deni es equal
protection beca use it does not serve a compelli ng state interest
and is not narrowly ta ilored to achieve th at goa l. (6)
s tri ct-con struc tio ni st approach The view that judges should
decide cases strictly on th e basis of the langu age of th e laws and
th e Constitution. ( 16)
supe rde le ga tes Party lea ders a nd elected orricials who become
_
delegates to th e nationa l convention without havin g to run in
pri maries or ca ucuses. (9)
supply-side theory The belief th at lower ta xes and fewer regulation s will stimulate the economy. (8)
suspect classifi cations Cla ssifl ca t ions of people on the basis of
their race or ethnicity. (6)

J

J

An act that co nveys a politica l message. (5)

J

va len ce issue An issue about which th e public is united and rival
cand idates or politi ca l pa rt ies adopt sim il ar pos itions in hopes
that each will be thou ght to best represent those widely sha red
beliefs. (J 0)
veto m essage A message from th e presi dent to Congress statin g
that he wi ll not sign a bill it has passed. Mu st be produced within ten days of the bi ll 's passage. (14)
Virginia Plan Proposal to create a stron g nationa l government.

. b

(2)

\!Voice vote A congressional voting procedure in whi ch members
shout "yea" in approval or "nay" in disapprova l. permitting
members to vote quickly or anonymously on bi lls. (13)
vo tin g-age population Citizens who are eligible to vote after
reachin g th e minim um age requirement. (8)

J

~all

of separa tion Court ruling that government ca nnot be
invo lved with religion . (5)
whip A senator or representative who helps the party leader stay
informed about wh at party members are thinkin g. (J 3)
w hi te prima ry The practice of keeping blacks from voting in th e
south ern states' primaries through arbitrary use of registration
reqU irements and intimidation . (8)
worldvie w s A comprehensive opinion of how the United States
should respo nd to world problems. (20)
J wri t of certiorari An order by a hi gher court directing a lower
court to send up a case for rev iew. (16)

J

*-

NOTES

Chapter 1

The Study of American Government

1. Nationa l Co mmission on Terrori st Atta cks

Upon Ih e Uniled States. Til e 9/ II COllllllissioll
Report: HIIIII Report of tile Nllt iollal COllllllissioll
011 Terrori sl Attacks UpOII tile Ullited States
(New Yo rk and London: w.w. No rlon. 2004).
399.
2. Ibid .. 419.
3 . Aristotle. Politics. iv. 4. 1290 b More precisely.
Aristotle's definition was this: Democracy is a
"constitution in which the free-born and poor
control the govern ment- bei ng at the same
time a majority." He distin guished this from

a n ol igarc hy. "i n which the rich and well-born
control the government- being at the same
time a minority." Aristotle listed severa l varielies of democracy. depending on whether. for
example. there was a property qualifica tion

4.

5.

6.
7.

8.

for cil izenship.
joseph A. Sch umpeter. Capilalislll. Socia lislll.
alld Delllocracy. 3d ed. (New York: Harper
Torchbooks. 1950). 269. (First published in
1942.)
Karl Marx a nd Friedrich En gels. "The Manifesto of the Communist Party." in Tile MarxIilllJl'ls Ileade,: 2d cd .. cd. Robert C. Tu cker
(New York: Norlon . 19 78) . 469- 500.
C. Wrighl Mills. 'I'I,e POlVer Hlile (New York:
Oxford University Press. 1956).
H. H. Ger th and C. Wright Mills. eds .. FI'OIII
Max Weber: Essays ill Sociology (London: Roulledge and Kegan Paul. 1948). 232- 235.
Among the authors whose interpretation s of
American politics are essen ti ally pluralist is
David B. Truman. The Governl1lel1tal Process.

2d ed. (New York: Knopf. 1971).
9. Kay L. Sch lozma n et at:. "Inequalities of Political Voice: A Background Memo to the American Political Scien ce Association Task Force
on In equality and America n Democracy."
Washington. D.C.: American Political Scien ce
Associa tion. january 2004. p. I. Also see
Larry M. Bartels et al.. "Inequality in American Gover/la nce: A Background Memo to
the America n Polit ical Science Associatio n
Ta sk Fo ~e on In equality and Ame ri can
De moc racy." Wa shin gton. D. C.: American
Pol itica l Sci!lnce Association. january 2004:
a nd jacob Hacker et al .. "I-low Policies Affect.
Equa{9y- Stratiflcatioll. Cilb:enship. a nd
Ame ri ca n Public Policy : A Backgrou nd Memo
to th e American Politica l Science Association
Ta sk Force on I nequality and American

De mocracy." Wa shin gton. D. C.: Am e ri can
Politica l Science Association. january 200 3 .
10. Schlozman.2 1.
I I . Alex is de Tocqueville. De'" 0'Ta,,!! ill Alllerim.
vol. 2. ed. Phillips Bradley ( ew York: Knopf.
1951 ). book 2. ch.8. 122.

12. Derek C. Bok and lohn 1'. Dunlop. L"fJor "lid the
A'lIeric"" COIIIIIIIII,ity (New York : Simon and
Schuster. 1970). I 34.

Chapter 2

The Constitution

I . Quoted in Bernard Bailyn. The Illeolol/ical Ori!linS of the A'lIericall Revoilltioll (Ca mbrid ge:
Harvard Unive rsity Press. 196 7) . 6.1. n. 6.
2. Quoted in Bai lyn. ibid .. 135- 137.
3. Quoted in Bai lyn. ibid .. 77 .
4. Quoted in Bailyn. ibid .. 160.
5. Federalist No.3 7.
6. Gordon S. Wood. Th e Creatioll of the Alllericon
ReplIblic (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. 1969). See a lso Federalist No. 49.
7. Letter of George Washington to Henry Lee
(October 3 1. 1 787). in Writillgs of George
Wash illl/loll. vol. 29. ed. John C. Fitzpatrick
(Washin gton. D. C.: Government Printing
Ornce. 19 39). 34.
8. Letters of Thomas jeffe rson to james Madison
(January 30. 1787) and to Colonel Wi lliam S.
Sm ith (November J 3.1787). in jeffersolll-limself, cd. Bernard Mayo (Boston: Houg hton
Mil'llin. 1942). 145.
9. H,lIel'{l li sl No.5 I .
I U. Fedemlist No. 48.
I I. H'del'{llist No.5 I .
12. Ibid.
13. Ibid .
14. "The Address and Reasons of Dissen t of the
Min ority of th e State of Pennsy lvania to Their
Constit uents," in The AIII.i-Federalist. ed.
Cecelia Kenyon (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
19(6). 39.
15. Max Farrand. The Frallling of Ihe COllstillltiOIl of
the Ullited Stales (New Haven. Conn.: Ya le University Press. J 91 3). 185.
16. See. for exa mple. john Hope Franklin. Racial
Eqllality ill Alllerica (Chicago: Uni versity of
Chicago Press. 19 76). ch. 1. esp. 12- 20.
J 7. Max Farrand. 'I'l,e Records of the Federal COIIvelllion of 1787. 4 vols. (New !-Iaven. Con n.:
Yale Uni versity Press. 1911 - 19 37).
18. T heodore I. Lowi. Americall Goverlllllellt:
III complete CO llifllest (Hinsda le. III. : Dryden
Press. 1976). 97.
19. Article I. section 2. para. 3.
20. Article I. section 9. para. 1.
2 1. Ar ticle IV. seclion 2. pa ra. 3
22 . Cha rles A. Beard. All ECOIIOlllie Illterpretatioll of
Ihe COllstill,tiOIl (New York: Macmillan. ] 9 13).
esp. 26- 5 1. 149- 15 1. 324- 325.
23. Forrest McDonald. We the People (Chicago:
Unive rsity of Chicago Press. J 9 58): Robert E.
Brown. Clmries Beard IIl1d th e COII SlitlltiOIl
(Prin ce ton:

1956).

Prin ce ton

University

Press.

24. Robert A. McG uire. "Constitu tion Makin g: A
Rational Choice Model of Ihe Federa l Conventi on of ] 787." A",eri('{/II jOl/mal of Politiml
Sciellce 32 (May 1988): 483- 522. See a lso
Forrest McDona ld. No vlls Ordo Sedonllll
(Lawren ce: Unive rsity of Kan sas Press.
1985).221.
25. McDona ld. Novl/s Orllo Sec/orlllll. 202- 22 1.
26. Robert A. McGui re and Robert L. Ohsfeldt.
"Economic In terests and the American Constitution: A Quantitative Rehabilitation of
Charles A. Beard." jOllmal of Ecollomic History
44 (June 1984): 509- 519.
27. Lloyd N. Cutler. "To Form a Government. "
Foreign Affairs (Fall 1980): 126-143.

Chapter 3

Federalism

]. Woodrow Wilson. COllstit ll tional Gover",." ent in

2.

3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

tI,e U"ited SllItes (New York: Columbi a University Press. 1961). 173 . (First published in
1908.)
David B. Truman. "Federa lism and the Party
System." in Fedel'lllislll: Mllture III1lI Emerge"t.
ed. Arthur MacMahon (Ga rden City. N.Y.:
Doubleday. 1955). J 23.
Ibid .
Harold j. Laski. "The Obsolescence of Federa lism." NelV RepulJlic (May 3. 1939): 3 67- 369.
Will ia m A. Rike r. 1:",leralis'lI: OrilJi/l. Operatioll.
SilJllijicallce (Boston : Little. Brown . 19 64).
154.
Daniel j. Rlazar. America" Federa lism: A VielV
frolll tire States (New Yo rk: Crowell. 19(6).
2 16.
Marlin Diamond. "The Federa lists' View of
Federa li sm." in Essays in Federa li sm. ed.
George C. S. Benson (Clare mont. Ca lif.: In stitute for Studies in Federa lism. 1961 ). 21- 64:
a nd Samuel H. Beer. "Federalism. Nationa lism. and Democracy in America," American
Political Science Review 72 (Marc h 1978):
9- 21.
Ullited States v. Sprague. 282 U.S. 716 (193]).

9. Garcia v. San AHt01l io Metropoli tall Tran s il

10.
1 1.

12.
13.
14.
15.
J 6.

Allthority. 105 S. Ct. 1005 (1985). overruling
National League of Cities" Usery. 426 U.S. 833
(1976).
McCllllocll v. Marylllllll. 4 Wheat. 316 (1819) .
Pollock v. !-Imner, LOlln b Tr/lst Co .. 1 57 U.S.
429 (1895): SOllt ll Carolina" Baker. No. 94
( 1988).
Texas v. White. 7 Wa ll. 700 (1869).
Cllampioll v. Ames. 18S U.S. 32 1 (190 3).
Hoke v. United Stlltes. 22 7 U.S. 3 08 (19 13).
Clllrk Distillillg CO. V. W Md. fly .. 242 U.S. 3 11
( 1917).
I-lipolite Egg Co. v. United States. 220 U.S. 45
(19 /1 ).

NI

Notes

N2

State~ v. E. C. Klligilt Co .. 15 6 u.s. 1
(1895 ).
18. Palll v. Virgillia. 8 Wal l. 168 (1869 ).
19. Veazie Balik" Pellllo. 8 Wa ll. 533 ( 1869).
20. BrolVlI v. Mar!! lallll. 12 W heat. 4 19 ( 1827).
2 1. Wickard v. FillJ/l,.". 3 17 U.S. I I I ( 194 2):
NUW v. JOlles [7 Lallgillill St(·1'i Corp.. 3() I
U.S. 58 ( 1937).
22. Kirscflballlll Co. " Wallillg. 3 16 U.S. 5 17 ( 1942 ).
23 . Goldjilrb v. Virgillia Slnte Bar. 42 1 U.S. 773
( 1975): Flood" Kllil lI. 407 U.S. 258 ( 1972):
GOllZales v. Raicil (0 3- 1454) . 2005.
24. Ullited States v. CaliJorllia. 332 .S. J 9 ( 1947) .
25 . Morto n Grodzins. 'I'ile Illllerienll Sy~telll (C hi cago: Rand McNally. 1966).49- 50.
26. Max Sawicky. Eco nomic Po licy Institute Brief
#176. Was hi ngton. D.C .. Feb ruary 14. 2002:
U.S. Offiee of Management and Budget. SIIIIIlIIar!! COlllposition oj TOlal Ollt/a!!s Jar Grallts to
State alld Local Goverllments. 1940-200 1
(Was hin gton. D.C.: Governme nt Printing
Office. 2(02 ).
27. Martha De rthi c k. Keepill!! tile CO IllPOlllld
/lepllblic: Essa!!s all Americall Federalism (Was hington . D. C.: Brookings Insti tuti on. 2(0 1).
140.
28. Donald F. Ketti. ed .. 'I'ile Departlllellt oj I-Iolllela"d Security's First \'ear: A Report Card (New
York: Century Fo und a ti o n Report. 2(04 ). 18.
102.
29. Sa muel H. Beer. "The Modernization of American Federalism." PllblillS 3 (Fa ll 1973): esp.
74-79: and Beer. "Federa lism ." 18- 19.
30 . R. Dou g la s Arno ld. "Th e Loca l Roots o f
Domesti c Po licy." in 'I'ile NelV COllwess. cd.
Thomas E. Mann and Norman J. Orn stein
(Was hington. D.C.: America n En terprise Institute. 198 1).268 .
3 1 . Congressiona l Budge t Office. Federal COII -

17. Ullited

straints 011 SUIte (ll1d Local Govermllel1L Actions

32.

33.

34.
35 .

36.

(Was hingto n. D. C.: Govern m e n t Printin g
Office. 19 79).
Federally illdllced Costs Ilffectill!! State alld I,oenl
Governmellts (U.S. Advisory Commission o n
Intergove rnm en tal Relation s. September
1994) .
Stephen V. Monsma. PlIttillg Paitil ill Partllersilips: WeIJare-to-Work ill FOllr Cities (An n
A rbor: Un iversity of Michigan Press. 20(4).
Also see Ri ch a rd J> Na than. Tile "Nollprojilizalioll " Movelllellt as a 1'01'/11 oj Devol"liol/ ( ew
York: The elson A. Rockefeller Institute of
Government. October 1996).
Will Marsh a ll. '/\fter Dependence." BI"epril/t
Uanuary/Fe bruary 20(2): 1 8.
R. Kent Weaver. "Deficits and Devoluti on in
th e 104th Congress. " unpu bli s hed dra ft
paper. Was hin gto n. D.C .. Broo kings In stitutio n. April 1996.
'I'lle P"blic Perspective (April / May 1995) : 5.

Chapt er 4

American Political Culture

I . A lex is de Tocq ucvillc. DemOCm('1 ill Al1I erica,

cd. Phillips Bra dl ey (New York: Kn opf. 195 1).
vo l. 1.288. (First publis hed in 1835.)

2. Ibid .. vo l. I . 3 19- 32 0.
3. Ibid .. 3 19 .
4. Do nald J. Devine. 'I'llI' i'olitiml C"/t,, re of tlle
UI/ited Stlll.e~ (Bos ton: Little. Brown. 1972).
18 5: Il erbert McClosky and Jo hn Za ller. 'I'llI'

111/",ril'lll/ liliIOS: P"h/ic All ill/des 'I'o\\lllrd Ca piUIIi SII1

alld Dl'lIlOlT((C,IJ

Almond a nd Sid ney Ver ba. cds .. 'I'll e Civic ClIIWI''' I< evi~ited (Boston : Little. Brown. 1980).
23. Sidney Verba et al .. Voice alld liqllalit!!: Civil'
VolW/laris", ill II", erin", Politics (Cambrid ge:
Harvard Uni vers ity Press. 1995 ).69. 70 .
2 4. Ken neth

(Ca mbridge: Il ar vard

Unive rs ity Press. I Y84 ). c h . 3. es p. 74- 75.

5. McClosky and Za ll er. 'I'll I' Alllerical/

I ; tll o~.

74-77 .
6. Ibid .. 60 .

7. Gunnar Myrdal. 1\" Americall Dilel1lma: Th e
Ne!lru Prohlcl1I ;11 Modern Democrat!) (New
York: Ilarper. J Y44). intra. a nd ch. J .
g, Frank H. Wcslie. '; 'I'hc A meri ca n Dilemm a: A n
Empi ri cal Test." Americal/ Sociological Heview

30 (A ugu st] 9( 5) : 536- 537.
9. Eric L. McK itri c k. "Party Po litics and the
Uni o n a nd Confedera te Wa r Efforts. " in 'I'llI'
Americal/ Party Systems, cd. William Nisbet
Chambers and Walter Dean Burnham . 2d cd.
(Ne w York: Oxford Uni ve rsity Press. 19 75) .
11 7-121.
10. McClosky and Za ller. 'I'lle Americal/ Etllos. 1 74.
II . Sidney Verba and Gary R. Orren. El/ualit!} iI/
Am('/'iCll: 'I'lle View Jrom tlle '1'01' (Cambrid ge:
lI arvard University Press. 1985). 146- 147.
12. McC los ky and Za ll er. '1'1 ", Americal/ lOt/IDS.
82- 84.
J 3. Ibid .. 93. 95.
] 4 . Ve rba an d Orren. Equality ill America. 74:
McClosky and Zal ler. 'I'll" Amail'lll/ Etllos. 126.
1 5. Ve rba a nd Orrell . Elf/ltllit!J ;1/ America, 72,
254.
16. Dona ld Kinder ' ll1d David Scars. "Sy mbo lic
Hacism Versu s Hac ial Threats to the Good
Life." /o"mal of Persol/ality awl Sociall'syc1lOloflY 40 ( I 981): 4 14-43 I .

Performance?," paper presen ted at lhe Annu -

al M ee tin g of th e I\m erica n Politi cal Science
Associa ti on. Atl a nta. Ga .. September 1999.
tab les 8. 1 and S .3.
25. Paul M. Sniderm an. A QlIeslioll oj Lo!!alty
(Berkeley: Uni ve rs ity of Calirornia Press .
JY S I ).
26. Ve rba an d Orrcn. Eqllalil!) ill !\ meric(l, 255 .
27 . George Ga llu p. j r.. and Th o mas jon es. 'I'll e

Next A",ericall Spirit llality: Fi",/illll God ill tlle
'I'lVellly-First Cm /llry (Co lo rado Springs. Colo.:
Cook. 20(0): Ke nn eth D. Wald. /l e/igioll
alld Politics ill tlle Ullit ed States. 3d ed. (Washington. D. C. : Con gressio na l Quarterl y Press.
1997): Samuel I~ Huntin gton. A",erican Politics: Tlle Proll/ise oj Dislla/,/lIollY (Ca mbridge:
Har va rd Uni ve rsity Press. 19 81) . 154- 166:
Seymour Martin Lipset Tile First New Nation
(New Yor k: Doubleday Anc hor Books. 19( 7) .
170. 17 1.
28. Ga llu p and jo nes. 'I'lle Next AlI ",ric{// I Spirit.lIal-

ity. 25.
29. Ibid .. 94 .
30 . Ram A. Cnaan el al.. Til e Newl'/' Deal: Heliflioll

3 1.

32 .

17. Pau l M . Snidennan and Mi chael Gray iia gen,

Ha('(' alld 111l'l/lfalil!J: A Stuily in American Vallfes
(C hatham. N.j.: Chatham Iio use. 1985 ). I I I .
1 S. Ibid .. 37- 38 .
19. Theodo re Caplow a nd Howard M. Bahr. "Il a if
a Century o r Chan ge in Ado lescent Altitudes:
A Ik plication of a Middletow n Sur vey by the
Lynds." Plllilic Opillioll Q"arterl!1 4 3 (J 979):
1- 17. tab le 1.
20. T homas j. Anton. "Po licy-Making a nd Politica l Cu ltu re in Sweden," Scalldinaviall Political
Studies 4 (1969 ): 88- 100: M. Dona ld Ha ncock. SlVedel/: Tlle Polilics oj Post- llIdllstrial
Clu",!}c (Hinsda le. III.: Dryde n Press. 19 72) :
Sten Joha nsson . "Libera l-Democrati c Theo ry
a nd Pol iti ca l Processes. " in /l eadillgs ill tlle
Swedi ,~ /J Class Struct ure. cd, Ri chard Sca rse
(New York: Pergamon Press. 1976): Steven j.

ewton and Pipa No rri s. "Co nll-

dence in Pu blic Instilution s: Faith, Culture or

33.

34.
35 .

36.

37 .

alld Socia l Work ill Parlllersilip (New York :
Columbia Uni verSity Press. 1999 ).
Pew Center fo r the People an d the Press. HelifliOll alld Poli tics: 'I'll e A",lii"al,,/t Majorit!l
(Washin gto n. D. C.: Aut hor. 2(00).
Pew Forum o n Reli gio n a nd Public Life. Lift
Every Voke: A HeporL all He/if/ioll jn Al1I ericm!
PII!J/iC LiJe 2002 (Washin gto n . D. C.: Autho r.
20(1) .
Max Weber. Ti, e Prot est.allt Htilic alld tile Spirit
oj Ca pitalis",. tran s. Talcott Parso ns (New
York: Scribn er· s. 19 3 0 ). (First published in
1904.)
Erik H. Erikso n. C" ild"ood alld Society (New
Yo rk : Norton. 1950). c h . 8.
T he phrase "c ulture wa r" is fro m Ja m es
Davison \-Junter. C,,/ture W"rs: 'I'''e Struggle to
DeJi" e flllleri ca (Ne w York: Basic Books.
1991). T his disc ussion draws heavi ly o n Professor Hunter's a nalysis.
Ibid .. 96-97. 11 6-11 7. Sec a lso Robe rt
Lern e r. Sta n ley Ro tham. and S. Rob ert
Lic hter. "Chri s/ian Religiou s Eli tes." Public
Opillioll I I (March i Apr il 1989): 54- 58.
Ga ry Or re n. "Fall From Grace: T he Pu blic's

Kelman, /{e(ju/aUIl!J AH/l'fit'a, Hegll/aUng Swe-

Loss of Failh in Governm ent." in Joseph Nyc.

dell: A Co",parative s wd!l of ()cl'lIpalio",d Sajft!l
alld I/ealtll Polic!l (Cambrid ge. Mass.: MIT

j r.. Philip D. Zelikow. and Dav id C. Kin g. cds ..
W,,!! People DOId Trllst Gov,.r"III"" t (Ca mbridge. MA: Il a rvard Uni ve rs ity Press. 1997).
77- 10 7 . and Ro be rt J. Ble ndon. et a l..

Press. 198 1). 1 18- 123.
2 I. Lewis Austin. Sai llts alld S"'"l1mi: 'I'llI' Political
Cllltllre of A",ericall a",1 /al" ",,,se IWtes (Nc w
II "ven . Co nn.: Yale tlni versity Press. 1975).
22. Ga briel Almon d and Sidney Verba. 'I'll" Civic
CUI/lift' ( Princeton. N. J.: Princeton Universily
Press. 19(3). 169 . 185. Sec also Gabrie l

"Chan gin g Altitudes in A mcri ca." in ibid ..

2 0 5- 2 16.
3S. Ibid .
39 . The Ga llup Organization. 1'011 Heleases Uu ne
19. 1997).3- 6.

Notes
40. Sa mu el H. Barnes and Max Kaa se. cds .. Po Iitim/ l\c'lioll: lWnss Participatioll ill Fiw l)el1lO('-

12 . Ylltes v. Ull ited Silli es. 354 U.S. 298 (1957 ).

N3

42. Elllplo!llllelli Divisioll . DeparU lll'lI t.

of

/l lIIllall

1 3. Brlllldelllmr!1 v. Ohio. 395 U.S. 444 ( 1969).

HesoJirces of Ore!IOII v. SlIIiLlI. J J 0 S. ct.

19 79).

14 . Vil/O!/l' of Skokie v. NoliO/lII1 Socialist Part!l. 432

( 1990).

54 1- 542 . 574.
4 1. Marc J. I lcth crington. "'I'hc Effcct of Poli tic;iI

I1.S. 4 3 ( 19 77): 366 N.E. 2d 349 (19 77) : and
373 N.E. 2d 2 1 ( 19 7H).
15. H.A. V v. Cily oI 81. Palil. I 12 S. Cl. 1538
( 1992).
16. W iS<'OIISi ll v. Mildwl/. No. 92- 5 15 ( 1993).

J

mcies (Beverly Hill s. Calif.: Sage.

Tru st on th e Presidential VOl e. 196 X- Yh,"
I\ I1I eri('(l1I Pniili('(l/ .\ 'c iell(,(, Ht'v;cw, 93 (Jun e

1999): 3 1 1- 327.
42. Jam es W. Prothro an d Charl es M. Grigg. "Fun -

4~.

/iI'S

Agreement and Disagrcement." jOl/1'I1II1 of Politics 22 (Sprin g 19(0 ): 275- 294 .
Jam es 1\. Da vis. '·Communism . Co hort s. and

I n4). I OO.

1 9~4

and

1972 - 19 7"3 ." AII/aimll 1011/'110/ of Sociolo!1i1

H I ( 1975): 491 - 513: and Clydc A. Nunn.
Harry J. Crockett. Jr.. and J. A llcn Williams. Jr..

1982). 19 3. fn 1S9.

20. Justice Stewa rt's fa molls rema rk was made in

of Cllllllgill!f COII/II/itll/ ell t to Civil U1wrties (Sa n

h is concurr ing opin ion in jocobellis \( Oh io.
378 U.S. 184(1964). 19 7.
2 1. M iller \( Cllli)a m ia. 41 3 U.S. 15 ( 1973).
22 . l ellkills 1'. Geor!/ia. 4 18 U.S. 15 3 ( 1974).
23 . .'idlnd \( BOro1ly11 of Mt. Ephm illl. 452 U.S. 61
( 198 1).

44. Sec. for example. Joh n L. Sullivan. James
Piereson. and George F. l" larcu s. Politia d 'l'ole r{fll('l' (/11(/ Americall JJelllOcrac!J (Chicago: Uni verSity of Chicago Prcss. 1982). 194- 102.

Chapter 5

Civil Liberties

I . Zlu,wI'II " POII/em!l. 639 E2d 1162 ( 1911 I ): Coss"
Lopez. 4 19 II.S. 565 ( 1975): 'l'illkl'l" " Des Moilles
('Olllllllll iitil Scllool Dislriel. 393 U.S. 503 ( 1969):
SlIIilIl 1'. CO!/Ilfll. 4 15 U.S. 566 ( 19 74): Nell' jerSI',I/ v. 'I: 1,, 0 .. 469 U.S. n 5 ( 19H5).
2. SlJeppard \( Ma.\'lI'el/. 3H4 II.S. 333 ( 19(6): /111'111
\'ork 'I'illll'S Co. 1'. Ullited SIllies . +03 U.S. 7 1 3
( 1971): KIII I:" N ell'\'1 lrk. H O U.S. 290 ( 1951).
3. Barf(m 1'. Ba/tilllore. 7 Pel. 243 ( I H3 3).
4. Cllil'll!1O- Bllrlill!I/(III. alld QUilll'll Hailroad Co. v.
C/li m!JO. 1611

.S. 226 ( 19H7): Gitloll' v. Ne lli
\'ork. 26X U.S. 652 ( 19 15).
5 . Palko 1'. COlllleeticlI /. 302 U.S. 3 L9 ( 19 37).
6. Wi ll iam Bla ckston e. CO I1l1l1 r"taries. vol. 4
( / 76;). 151- 152.
7. Jeffer so n 's remarks are from a leiter to A bigai l
Adams (quoted in Wa ller Bern s. 'I'llI' First
Alllendlllellt alld tile FlIllire of AlllericlIII DenlOcmc!} INew York: Basic Books. 1976 1. X2 and

from a letter to Th omas McKean. gover nor of

Pennsylvania. Fcbruary 19. 180 3 (Paul L.
Ford. ed.. Th e W rit illgs of TholllllS l effersOl I:
IIW 1- 1806. vo l. 8 [ ew York: Putn am.
l X97 1. 218.
8. Schenck 1'. Ullit ed Stotes. 249 U.S. 47 ( 19 19).

I'o ll sill v. Yoder. 4011 U.S. 20 S ( 1972): 1/01,iJil'v.
UIII'II ,plo!lllll'/ll AppJ'{/ls COII/Illi ss iOIl or 1:loridli.

u.s.

1 36 ( 19H 7) : Iistnte I~r 'I'/ /O /'II tOIl v. Cnl-

dOl: IlIc.. 472 II.S. 70 3 ( 19H5).

46. Ber ns. Til e Fi rst. A1I1e"d",eI1L
4 7. Pritche tt. COI ISliWUOllfll Civil LiiJerlie..·. 145- 147.
48. EVl'rsoll v. Boord of Edllcolio ll . 33 0 U.S. 1
( 1947).
49 . Ellyelv. Vilole. 370 U.S. 421 (1962).

'l'olemllce for NOllcollforll/ity: A No tiollol Sl/rve!l

Fran cisco : Jossey-Bass. 19 78). But compare
thc different co ncl usion in John I.. Sull iva n.
James Picrcson . and George E. MarcLls. Polili ('{II To/emnet' (lIId Americall Delllocracy (Ch icago:
Univer sity of Ch icago Press. 19 82).

45. Sl lI'rberlv. VI'r ll n. 374 U.S. 398 ( 1963): W is-

480

424 U.S. 448 (19 76).
19. Henry ). A braham. I'rel'dolll allli the CO ll I'/. 4 th
cd. ( ew York: Oxford Univer sity Press.

Lee. I 12 S.

44 . W'I,,/i " Ullil ed Sioles. 398 U.S. B 3 ( 1970):
Prit chett, COll . . tilllliolla / Civil UhcrUes, 140- 14 1.

(En glewood Cliffs. N.J.: Pren ti ce- li ali.

18. Ne w YO"k 'I'illl e.' v. 81111ivlIlI. 376 U.S. 254
( 1964): but compare Til1l e. I,I C, \ ~ Firesto1le.

I(

Ct. 270 1 ( 1992).

17. C. Il erm an Pritehclt. COII"lil.lltiollal CivilUber-

damcnta l Principles of Democracy: B<lses of

Ca tegori es: A merica n Tolera nce in

43. Sociel!l for Krishllll COllscio llSlless

J 595

24. Hil m es v. Glell Thelltre. II I S. Ct. 2456 ( 1991 ).

50. LJlbbock Illdepelldellt School Dist rict

I(

LJlbbock

Civil Liberties Ullioll. 669 F2d H l3X.
51. Schoo l DisU'ict of A lii ll ytO ll 'li!lvllsl, ip v. Schelllpp.

374 U.S. 203 ( J%3).
52 . Lee v. We isllloll . 11 2 S. Ct. 2649 (199 2) : Sall ta
PI' Illdepelldellt "dIDo l District v. Jnllc /Joe. 530

U.S. 290 (2 000).

53. Eppersoll " Arkallsas. 393 U.S. 97 (19118 ):

25. A lll erico ll Hooksellers Associat i oll v. 1-/JldIlJlt.

Mc Leall 1'. Arkallsas Board of Edl/CIIUOII. 529 F.

771 F.2d 323 ( 19 85). aflirmcd at 475 U.S.
100 1 ( 1%6).
26 . l~rlllO" v. Playtil1l l' TI1 C'nt res. 475 U.S. 4 1
( 1986). Sec also YO llllrJ v. AlI1erical/ JVlil1i '/'hmlres. I llc .. 42711.S . 50 ( 19 711).
27 . HellO v. Alllericoll Civil Uberties Ullioll. 51 1 U.S.

Supp. 1255 ( 198 2).

H44 ( I 997) : Ashcroji v. Free Speedl COli/itiOIl.
122 S. Cl. I 3g 9 (2002).
28 . Ullited Stotes II. O·llril'll. 39 1 II.S. 367 ( 19 ()H) .
2 9. 'Ii'.\'OS V. 101111.,0" . 109 S. CI. 2533 ( 1989).
30. U.S. v. /;iclllll(JI1. 496 II.S. 3 10 ( 199 0 ).

54. McColIlIlIl" Board IIf EdllcatiOIl. 333 U.S. 20 3
( 1948): %II I'(1C/i II. CIOil SOIl . 343 U.S. 306
( 1952).
55. Till 1111 " Hidlllrdsoll . 40 3 U.S. 672 ( 19 7 1).
56. Board of Edllcatioll v. A 111'11. 392 U.S. 236
( 1968 ).
57. Wlllz" '/(!.\, COllllllissioll. 397 U.S. 664 ( 19 70).
5H. MIII'I/er 1'. AIII'II . 463 U.S. 3XX ( 1983).
59. %obresl

II.

3 I . I'i rsl Notiolla l BOllk of Hostoll " Bel/otti. 435
II.S. 765 ( 1978): Fedeml t;/ectioll COI lllll issiolll'.
Mossochllse L/ s Citizells for /.ife. IlIc.. 4 79 U.S .
238 (l9X(1 ).
32. 44 U(/IlOl'IIlIIrl " Illwde Islolld. 5 I 7 U.S. 4g4
( 1996 ): Greoter N ell' Orlelills Hrolldl'n slill!f
Associotioll v. Ullit ed Stol es . 527 U.S. 1 73

4485.
60.

1,1'1110 11

v. Kllrtzllla ll . 40 3 U.S. 60 2 ( 197 1).

61. COllllllillel' fo r Pllblic Iidlll'llUOII v. NY'I lIisl. 4 1 3

U.S. 756 ( 19 73) .
62. Meek" Pillell!/I'r. 42 1 U.S. 349 (1975): Wol11111111'. Walter. 433 U.S. 229 ( 1977).
113. Edwards" A!luillard. 4H2 u.s. 5 71> ( 198 7) :

( 1999).

Boord of EdllClilioll of Kiryos l oel Vi I/aye School

33 . PacijJc Gas olld E1eeLric Co. v. PlliJliC Utilities

1'.

LOllis Grlllll e/. I 14 S. Ct. 248 ] (1994).

COlll llli.,sioll . 4 75 U.S. 1 ( 198(,). Some li mita-

64. Agostilli

tions on corporatc speech have been upheld.
incl ud in g a state law proh ibiLing a fir m fro m
spendin g money on candida tes fo r elective

65.

oflke.

66.

A Ji sti ll v. M ichigall Challlber

of

COIII-

IIIl'I'Ce . 100 s. ct. 1 39 1 ( 199 0).

67.

34 . Board of '/'/'ll stees of Ih e Stol.(' UlliJ'l'I'sit!l of New
Yo rk v. 1'0.\'.492 II.S. 469 ( 1989) .
35. Boles II. Slol.e HoI' of Arizollo. 433 U.S. 350

68.

69.

(19 77) : Edl'lljJdd v. HOlle. 11 3 S. Ct. 1792

52.
9. Git/Oll' v. New \'ork. 268 U.S. 652 ( 1925) .6 611.
10 . Fi ske v. KIIII SIiS. 274 U.S. 3S0 ( 192 7) :
51 ro lll/rI'l"!1 \( Califomia. 2H 3 I1.S. 359 ( 19 3 I ):
Nfllr 1'. Millllesow. 283 I1.S. (,9 7 ( 193 1): De
101l!/l' v. Ore!!,," . 299 U.S. 353 ( 193 7) .
I I . Dell ll is v. Ull i/ed StMes. 341 I1.S. 494 ( 195 I).
5 101'1'. The test wa s li r st fo rmu lated by Jud ge
Lea r ned I land of the courl or appea ls: sec Den-

(J 993).

3X . iV/ llrdock v. I'I'IIII".'IlvOllio . 3 19 U.S. 10 5 ( 1943).
39. C/lJl rch of IIII' Lllkllllli iJOllIIlII A!l1' II. Ci l.!I of
/l io lcoh. No. 9 1- 948 ( 1993).
4 0 . He!l lloids v. Ullitl'd Sllites. 9H U.S. 145 ( 11l7S).

IIis v. Ullil ed Slli tes. 183 F2d 20 I ( 195 0 ).2 12.

41. jocobsoll v. Massochllse/t s. 197 U.S . I I ( 1905 ).

36 . M cColl llel/ v. Fedeml E/ect ioll COllllll issioll. 124

S. CI. 6 19 (2 00 3).
37. /l mellVood School /Ji slricl.

Calalilla I-(lOl hil/s School Dislric/.. 50 9

U.s. I ( 1993): Mildwl/ v. lll'illl s. 20 00 Lex is

I(

Kllh/llll'il'r: 1'1. 01 ..

4X4 U.S. 2 110 ( 19XH).

70.
7 1.
72.
73.
74.

75 .

V. 1.'1'11.011. 52 1 U.S. 203 ( 1997) overru led AYlliiar v. Fe/toll . 473 U.S . 402 ( 1985) .
7:elll lall v. Si lll ll i ons- Hnr r is. 53 6 U.S. 6 3 9
(2 n02 ).
1,1'111011 v. Kllrl zlll llll. 40 3 U.S. 602 ( 1971).
L!llIch v. DO/lelly. 465 U.S. fi6S (1984) :
Alh'ylll'lIY \1, ACID. 109 S. Ct. 3086 (1989).
Marsh v. Cillilllbers . 492 U.S. 573 ( 1983) .
Yale Kam isa r. "Does (Did) (Should) the Excl usionary Ru le Res t on a 'Pri nci pled Ba sis'
Rath er T ha n an 'Empirica l Propositi on '?"
Creiyilloll Law Rel'i cw I II ( J 982- 1983):
565-667.
Wolf v. Colol'lldo. 33H U.S. 25 ( 1949).
Mappl'.Ohio. 36 711.S.1143( 196 1).
Cilillll'i 1'. Ca lijinllia. 39 5 U.S. 752 ( 1969).
WaSI';II!IIOII I'. C/lr islll(lII . 455 11.8. I ( 1982).
Oliller 1'. Ull i l l'd Stall'S. 466 U.S. 170 ( 1984).
ArkoIlSllsll. Sa lldl' rs.44 2 U.S. 753( 1979): Ilob-

l,illS 1'. Calijimlia. 4 5 3 U.S. 42 0 ( 198 1).

N4

Notes

76. Ullited States \( Ross. 456 .S. 798 (1982 ):
Mar!!lalld v. D!}soll. 199 S. Cl. 20 1 3 (1999 ):
Wuolllillg v. /lollghtoll. 119 S. Cl. 1297 ( 1999):
Whrell \( Ullit ed Stales. 5 17 .S. 806 (l996).
77. Wills toll v. Lee. 470 US. 753 (19B5).
78. Saw.!' Dakotll v. Ne ville. 459 U.S. 55 3 (1983):
Sel llllerher v. Ca liromia. 384 U.S. 757 (1966).
79. Ullited States v. DIIIIII. 480 US. 294 ( 19 87):
Calijarllia v. Cimolo. 476 U.S. 207 ( 1986): Cali/im,ia v. Came!!. 47 1 U.S . 386 (19S5).
80 . O'CollllOr v. Ortega. 480 U.S. 709 ( 1987).
8 1. EscoiJedo v. IIlillois. 378 U.S. 478 ( 1964):
Mirallda v. Arizolla. 384 U.S. 436 (J 966).
82. Mallou v. Ilogall . 378 U.S. I (1964).
83. Mimllda v. Arizolla. 384 .S. 436 (J 966).
84. Gilhert v. CaliJomia. 388 U.S. 263 ( 1967):
KirhU v. Illillois. 406 U.S. 682 (1972).
85. Estelle v. SIIIith . 45 1 U.S. 454 (1981).
86 . Brewer \( Willimlls. 430 U.S. 387 (1977).
87. IIlillois \( Perkills. 496 U.S. 292 (1990).
88. Missollri \( Seihert. 02-13 1 7 (2004) .
89. Dickersoll v. U.S .. 120 S. Cl. 2826 (2000).
90. HI/'e v. Michael C.. 442 US. 707 (1979).
91. Ullited StMes v. Leoll. 468 U.S. 897 (1984):
Massaellllsel.ts v. Sheppard. 468 U.S. 981
( 1984).
9 2. Nell' York v. Qllar/es. 467 U.S. 649 (1984 ): II riZOllO v. Fllllllillmll e. 111 S. Cl. 1246 (199 J ).
93. Nix\( Williallls. 467 U.S. 43] (1984).
94. Ex parle Qllirill. 3 17 U.S. I (1942).
95 . Haslll v. Bli sh. 0 3-334 (2004).
96. Hallldi \( Hlllll sJeld. 0 3-6696 (2 004).

15. /3rolVlI v. Board oj BdllC(ltiOll of TOl'eka. 347 U.S.
483 (l954) .
16. C. I-Icrma n Pritchett. CO llstiWI iOll,,1 Civi l LiberI.il's (Englewood Cli ffs. N.J .: Prcntice- Il all.
19H4). 250- 25 1. 26 1.
1 7. Creell et al. \( COllllt!! Scll ool Hoard oj Nell' Kelll
Co ,,"t!l. 39 I US. 43 0 ( 1968 ).
IX. Swallll II. CI"'rlot!e-Mecklmllll/'lf Board of lidllmlioll. 40 2 U.S. I ( I Y7 1).
19. Busin g withi n th e ccntr(1I city was upheld in

Arlllo"r \( Nix. 446 U.S. 93 0 ( 19 XO): Ke!les v.
Se/lOol Dist rict No. I. Denver. 4 13 U.S . 18 9
(J9 73): Millikell v. I3mdle!}. 4 18 U.S. 71 7
( 19 74): Board of Scll ool COllllllissiollers oj IIIdiallal'olis \( Bllckle!}. 429 U.S. 106 8 ( 1977): and
Scllool Board oj Hic/III IOIId \( Stale Board oj Bd,,('(Ilioll. 4 12 U.S. 92 (1972 ). BU Sing across city
lin es was upheld in Evalls v. Bllcll,,"a". 423
U.S. 963 (19 75). and Board oj fidllcaUoII v.
Newb" rg Are" COllllcil. 421 U.S. 93 1 ( 19 75).
20. Pasadella City Board oj BdIlC!lt.iOll \( Spallgler.
427 U.S. 424 (1976).
21. Sec. ror exa mple. Herbert McClosky and John
Za ller. Tile Alllericall Btllos (Ca mbridge: I-Iaryard Universily Press. 1984). 92. 100 : and

Civil Rights

I. Ullited States \( Cam/elle Pmdllcts Co .. 304 U.S.
144 ( 1938): Sail IIIItollio Illdepelldellt School
District \( Hodrigllez. 4 11 U.S. I ( 1973) .
2. Gunn a r Myrda l. All Alllericall Dilelllllla ( ew
York: Harper. 1944). ch. 27.
3. Richard Kluger. Silllple lusUce ( 'ew York: Randomll ouselVi nlilge Books. 1977). 89-90.
4 . Pau l 13. Shealsley. "White Altil udes Towa rd
the Negro." in 'I'he Negro fl lllericall. cd. Talcoll
Parsons and Kenneth 13. Clark (Boston:
Houghton Mimin. 1966).305.308.3 1 7.
5. Stml/der \( West Virginia. IOO U.S. 303 (1880).
6. Civil Hilll,ts Cases . 109 U.S. 3 (1883).
7 . Plessu v. Ferllusoll. 163 U.S. 537 (1896 ).
8. e ll/Hllliug \~ Richmond CoulIiy Board oj EdllcatiOll. 1 75 U.S. 528 (189 9 ).
9. Misso" ri ex rei. Gailles v. CO llado. 305 U.S. 337
( 1938).
10. Sipllei v. Board oj Regel/Cs oj tile Ulliversit!} oj
Okiallollla. 332 U.S. 631 (1948) .
II. Sweatt v. Poi liter. 339 U.S. 629 (1950): McLa ,,rill v. Okiallollla State Regellts Jor Hi!lll('r EdllratiOll. 339 U.S. 637 (1950).
12. 131'011'11 \( Board oj Bdllmtioll oj Topeka. 347 U.S.
483 ( 1954).
13. /3 roIVII \( Board oj lidllcatioll oj Topeka. 349 U.S.
294 ( 1955). This casc is often refcr rcd to as
"Brown II. "
14. Frcdcrick S. MOSleller and Dan iel J> Moyn iha n.
cds .. Oil /i'I'",/it!J oj Bd"caliollal Opl'orlllllitu
(New York : Ha ndom I-louse. 1972) . 60-62.

access to abortion s we re stru c k down in Plmllieci
Parentliood Federatioll oj en /tra! Nlissouri v. Dall-

data reported in Chapter 5 of thi s lex t.

22. NIlS. 19 52- 1990 CllllllllaUve D"ll/i'ile. 1992
NIiS Pre/Post ri/ectioll St lldu ( 1992).
23. Freelllall v. Pitts. 11 2 S. Cl. 1430 ( 1992).
24. I~obe rt S. Erikson and No rman R. Luubcg.
AlIIl'ric,," P"blic Opillioll ( ew York: Wilcy.
19 73).49 : Il azel Erskin c. "The Polls: Dcmon stra ti ons a nd Ha ec Ri ots." PHillie Opillion QI/ar-

Cha pter 6

4 1. E.E.O.C. v. Mndisoll COIIIIIIIII,ilU UlliLScllOOI District No. 12.8 18 F.2 d 577 ( 1987).
42. Michnel M. v. SIIperior COlin. 45 0 U.S. 464
( 1981).
43 . \lorchheilller \( Scll ool DistTict of Pllilndelpllia.
4 30 U.S. 70 3 ( 19 77).
44. Knllll \( Slll'vill. 4 16 U.S. 35 1 ( 1974) .
45. Seldesill!!er v. Bnllnrd. 4 19 U.S. 498 ( 1975 ).
46. Belllll'tI v. Dyer's Cllop /lollSe. 35 0 E Su pp. 153
( 19 72): Morri s v. Miclli!llll' St"te Board qj' EdllcatiOll. 472 f':2d 1207 ( 1973): Fil.z!lerald v.
Port er Mell'OI·inl/lospitnl. 523 F. 2d 7 16 (19 75) :
Krllze/ v. {'ode/I. 22 6 .W.2d 458 (1975).
47. Ullited Stntes v. Viril illin. 11 6 S. Ct. 2264
(1996).
48. Rostker v. Goldberil. 453 U.S. 57 ( 1981).
49. Gebser v. Ln!!o \listn Scllool District. I 18 S. Ct..
1989 (1998 ): ,",II'l'!lher " Boca Ratoll. 11 8 S.
Ct. 2275 ( 1998 ): Bllr/illatoll IIIdll stries v.
Ellertll. 11 8 S. Ct. 2257 (J 99 8) .
50. Griswold v. COllllecticllt. 381 U.S. 479 (1965).
51. Hoe v. Wnde. 4 10 U.S. 1 13 (19 73) .
52. Though t he co nsti tut ion a li ty of the Hyde
AmendJllen t "'las upheld in Harris \~ l\IIcRnc.
448 U.S. 297 (1980). olher limitations on

tnl!/ 3 1 (Winter 1967- 19(8): 654- 677.
25. Il oward Sc human, Charl otte Stec h. a nd
Lawren ce Bobo. Hodal IIUil.lltil'S ill 1\IIIl'rica

26.
27.
28.
29 .

30.
31.

(Ca mbridge: II <l rvard iJniversity Press. 19 85).
69.78- 79.
Ibid .. 102. 110. 127- 135.
Grove CitU Collelle v. Bell. 465 U.S. 555 ( 1984).
Ullited States v. Arlllstrollg. I 16 S. Cl. 1480
(1996) .
Pr01l10U llfj Coopera ti ve Strategic'S to Redllce
!lacial Profilillg: A 'l'ee/II,ical Gllide. chap. 9
(Santa Monica. CA: RA ND. April 2004).
Mlleller v. Oregoll. 20 S U.S. 412 ( 1908) .
Eq ua l Pay Act of 1963: Civil Ri ghts Act
or 1964. Tille VlI . a nd 1978 amendmenls
thereto: Education A mendm en ts

32 .
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38 .
39.

40.

or

J 972.

Title lX.
Heer/\( Reed. 404U.S. 71 ( 197 1).
FrollUero v. Richardsoll. 4 11 U.S. 677 ( 1973).
Stnlltoll v. Stall tall. 4 21 U.S. 7 ( 1975) .
Cmi!!v. Borell. 429 U.S. 190 (1976 ).
DOlhnnl v. Hmvlillsoll. 433 U.S. 32 1 ( 1977).
Cleve/nlld Bonrd oj fidllcatiOIl v. LnF/ellr. 4 14
U.S. 632 ( 1974).
Fortill v. Dnrlillat.oll Lillie Lenalle. 5 14 F.2d 344
( 1975).
!loberts v. Ullited Stntes lawees. 468 U.S. 609
( 1984 ): Bonrd oj Direct.ors !lotnr!J Ill terllntiollnl v. !lotnr!1 Clllh of D""rl.e. 48 I U.S. 537
( 1987).
Arizolln Govemill!1 COllllllittee jor '/(,x Deji" T"d
AIIII I/i iy alJ{l Deferred CO l1lpell SaUo lI Plm/ s v.
Nor ris. 463 U.S. 107 3 ( 198 3).

Jort h. 428 U.S. 52 ( 1976): Akroll \( Akroll Cellter
Jar Reproductive {{ea/tll. 462 US. 4 J 6 (19 83):
and Thombur!lll \\ AlllericlIIl Colleye oj Obstetri('illllS nlld GUllemloilists. 476 US. 747 (J 986).
53. Plnlllled Pm'ellt/lOod v. Cnsey. I 12 S. Ct.. 279 1
(1992 ).
54. Sc/wI/c'k v. Pro-Choice Nl'twork oj Wt'sterll NC'w
York. 5 19 U.S. 357 ( 1997).
55. Fo r a n argument in support

56.

57.
58.
59.
60.
6 1.

62.

63.

64.

or

a co lo r-bl ind

Constitution. see Andrew Ku ll. 'I'llI' Color- Blilld
CO llstillllioll (Ca mbridge: lI arvard Uni versity
Press. 1992 ).
ReYelIts oj tile Ulli versity oj CnliJomin v. Bakke.
438 U.S. 265 ( 1978).
Fllllilove v. K/IIl Zllick. 448 U.S . 448 (1980).
CitU oj !lie/ll11olld v. f. A. Crosoll Co .. 488 U.S.
469 ( 1989).
Metro BrondCtlstillg v. FCC. 497 U.S. 547
(1990) .
Nortllenstem Florida Call tractors v. Jacksollville.
No. 91 - 172 1 (199 3).
Firejlaill ers Local Ullioll No. 1784 v. S't.oLts. 467
U.S. 56 1 (1984): WUilallt v. Incksoll Board of
Educnlioll. 476 U.S. 267 ( 1986): CitU oj RicllIII oml v. I. A. CroSOll Co .. 488 U.S. 469 (1989).
Local No. 28 oj tile Sileet Metn l Workers' lllterIInti ollnl AssociaUoII v. E(f/'" I ElllploUlllellt
Opportullit!} COllllllissioll. 478 U.S. 421 (19 8 6):
Wards Cove PnckiWI Co. " Atollio. 4 90 US. 642
( 1989): Price Wnterllo llse v. /lopkills. 49 0 U.S.
228 ( 1989) . ( olc: Wnrds Cove a nd Price were
both superscded in pari by Ihe Civil Rights Act
or 1991.)
Fllililove v. KllltZllick. 44 8 U.S. 448 (1980):
Melro B/'Oni/cnstillil v. FCC. 497 U.S. 547
( 1990).
Ullil ed Steelworkers oj Alllerim v. Weber. 441
US. 19 3 ( 1979): 1011115011 v. S,,"ta Clam COl/I/ty
Tml/sportnliol/ Agellc!1. 480 US. 6 16 (1987).

Notes
65. WY!lanl v. lackson Board of Education. 476 U.S.
2 67 ( 1986): U.S. v. Paradise. 48 0 U.S. ]49
( 1987).
66. Seymour Martin Lipset and Wil liam Schneider. "A n Emergi ng National Consens us." Th e
New Hepublic (October 15, 1977): 8- 9.
67. john R. Bunze!' 'i\flirmative He-Actions," Public Opinion (Fe bruary/March 19 86): 45-49:
New York Times (December 14. 1997).
68 . Adarand Constructors v. Pena, 5 15 U.S. 200
(1995 ).
6 9. Hopwood v. Texas. 78 F. 3 d 9 3 2 ( 1996).
70. Gratz v. BoJJill!)el: 539 U.S. 244 (2 00 3).
7l. GruLLer v. Bollin!)e.: 539 U.S. 306 (2003).
72 . Bowers v. Hardwick. 47 8 U.S. J 86 ( 19 86).
73 . HOlli er v. Evans. 5 17 U.S. 620 ( 1996).
74 . Lalllrellce v. Texas. 53 9 U.S. 55S (2 00 3).
75 . Goodridge v. Department of Public lI ealLh. 440
Ma ss . 309 (2 00 3) and 440 Mass . 1201
(2 004).
76. Boy Scouts of Alnerica v. Dale. 530 U.S. 640
(2000).

Chapter 7

Public Opinion

and Ell iot Aronso n. 2d cd . (Read ing. Mass.:
Addison -Wesley, 19(9). vol. 5 . 376.
9. Norman H. Nie, Sidn ey Verba, and Jo hn
R. Petrocik. 'fI, e C/IOr/flillg American Voter

(Cambridge: Harva rd Un iversity Press, 1976),
c h. 4.
10. Karen M. Kaufman an d John R. Petrocik, "The
Chan gi ng Politics of America n Men : Understandin g the Sources of the Gender Gap,"
AI/Jeriml/ 10l/mal of Political Science 43 (1999):
864- S87 .
I I. Na tiona l Election Stud ies. Uni versity of Mich igan. Updated by Marc Siega l. 200 5 .
12 . Steve Sa le r. 'L\na lysis: The Votin g Gender

13 .

14 .

15.

I. George W Bishop. Alfred j. Tuchfarber, and
Robert W Olden dick. "19 84: How Mu ch Can
We Manipulate and Control People's A nswers

to Public Opini on Surveys?" paper delivered at
the 1984 annual meeting of the American
Politica l Science Association: Howard Schu man and S. Presser. Questions {lml Answers in
Attitude Surveys (New York: Academic Press.
198 1). c h. 5.
2 . For example, see Bernard Berelson et al.. Votin!): A Study of Opinion Forll1ation in a Presidential Call1paign (Chicago: University of Chi ca go
Press, 1954), and Ph ill ip E. Converse, "The
Nature of Belief Systems in Mass Publics." in
Ideology and Discontent. cd. David Ii. Apter
(New York: Free Press. 1964).
3. For example. see V. O. Key. TlJe HesponsilJle Wee-

16.

1 7.

Wre WafS Divert HdllcaUon {//1d Dist ract America

18.

Lomte (Cambridge: Harva rd University Press.

19(6); Samuci Popki n. 'I'Il e Heasollill!1 Voter:
C0l1l1l111nicatioll (lml Persuasioll ill PresidenLial

4.

5.
6.
7.

Call/paign s (Chicago : Uni verSity of Chicago
Press. 199 1): Benjam in I. Page a nd Robert Y.
Shapiro. The HatiOlJlJI PI/blic: PiJLy Years of
Trellds ill Americall s' Po/icy Preferel1ces (Chicago: University of Ch icago Press. 199 1).
Terry M. Moe, Sc/JOols. VOl/cllers. alld th e AII/ericon Pl/!JIic (Wash ington. D. C.: Brookings Institution. 2 00 1),253.
Ibid.
Michael W. Traugoll. "Can We Trust the Polls?"
The Brookin'fs Heview (S ummer 2(03): 9.
M. Kent jenni ngs and Richard G. Niemi. "The
Tran smi ssion

or

Political Va lues [rom Parent

to Child, " Alllericall Political Science Revkw 62

(Marc h 1968): 173: Robert D. Hess and Judith
V. Tomey, The Developll/ent of Political Attitl/des
iI/ Chi ldrell (Chicago: Aldine, 1 %7).90.
8 . Severa l studies of ch ild-parent agreement on
party preference are summa rized in DClvid O.
Scars. ';PoliticaI Behav ior, " in Tile Halldbook

of Social Psychology. ed. Gardner Lindxey

24. Richard E. Dawson, Pllblic Opinion (lnd Contem-

25.

26.

27.

Gap N arrows." United Press lnternation al

(www. upi.com). November 20. 2003. based
on election night surveys of 17.872 voters.
Alexander M. Astin. Four Critical Years: Effects
oJ CoLle!)e 011 Helie}s, Attitudes. alld Knowledge
(San Francisco : Josey-Bass. 19 78). 36- 38 .
Terry S. Weiner and Bruce K. Eckland. "Ed ucation and Politica l Party: The Effects of College or Socia l Class ?" Alllerican jOIlJ'Jlal of
Socioloyy84 (1979): 911- 928.
Kenneth Beineman , I'I/t YOllr Bodies Upon the
Wheels: Stu dent IlevolL in the '1 Y6()s (Chicago :
Iva n R. Dee, 2(01 ),62.
Eli7.abet.h Hamel et a l., "Younger Voters: Age
and th e Ameri can Electorate," PlliJlic Perspective (May / ju ne 1993): 13.
Russell jacoby. DO!lnllJtic Wisdolll: How the CIII-

19.

20.

21.

N5

28 .

porary Disarray (New York: Harper & Row,
19 73). ch. 4.
David A. Bositis. Public Opillion 1998: Political
Attitudes (Wash ington. D.C.: joint Center for
Po litical and Eco n omi c Stud ies (Octobe r
1998), table 18A.
The American Enterprise (NovemberlDecember
1998): 9 l. reporting data from a Till/ elC N
survey, August 1997.
David A. Bositi s. fo rewo rd by Eddie N.
Will iams. Dividing GeneratiOlls: The TrallsforJ11l1tion oJ A}dcrJII AII/erican Policy Views (Washington. D.C.: joint Center for Politica l a nd
Economi c Studies, 200l).
Bruce Ca in and Roderi ck Kiewiet. "Californi(;J's Comin g Mi nority Majority " Puillic Opinion (Fe bru ary/Ma rch 1986): 50- 52.

29, Li sa J, Montoya el al" "Lati na Politics: Gender,

Pa rti cipation. and Lea dersh ip," PS: Political
Science lind Politics 33 (September 2(00): 55 7.
30. Cain and Kiewiet. "Ca lifornia's Com ing
Mi nority Majority, " 50-5 2.
3 1. F. Chris Ga rcia et al.. "The Effects of Ethni c
Partisa nship on Electora l Behavior: An Ana lysis and Comparison of Latino a nd Anglo Voting in the 1988 Uni ted States Presidential
Electio n ," paper delivered at the Annu al Meeting of the America n Politi cal Science Association. September 3- 6,1992.
32 . Michael Barone, "We've Been Here Before:
Ethnicity a nd America . 1900 a nd 200n. "

( ew York: Doubleday. 1994), 3: and Wil liam

Brad ley Lecture, A meri ca n Enterpri se Insti-

Korn. 'I'll(' Americall [<'res/mulI1: ,[wenty Year

tute. October 4.1999 . 2J . 22.

Trends. 1966- 1 Y8 5 (Los An geles : High er
Edu ca tion In stitute. 1987). as cited in Kevin
Matson. lingaging Youth: COlllbating the Apathy
of YOlln!! Alllericans TOlllard Politics (New
Yo rk: The Century Foundation Press. 2(03),
J S.5 7.
Robe rt Putnam et al.. Better Together: Final
Il eport of ti,e Sagllaro SeJl1inar (Cambridge:
john F. Kenn edy Schoo l of Governme nt.
2(0 1). 77-7 8: and Sidney Verba et a l. . Voice
and Equality: Civic Voluntarislll in AlI1erican Politics (Ca mbridge: Harvard Un ive rsity Press .
1995),420 .
ja ne Eisner. Takin[lBack the Vote: GetUnll Allleric(m Youth Involved in 0111' Democracy (Boston:
Beacon Press. 20tl4). chs. 5 and 6.
Jo h n Za ll er, "Information . Values. and Opinion," American Politi cal Science /{evi ew B5
(1991): 1215- 1 238 .
Stephen Earl Bennett. "Yo ung America ns '
Ind ifference to Media Covera ge o f Publi c
Affairs." PS: Political Science (S ummer 1998):
535- 541.

22. Kay Lehman Sch lozman and Sidney Verba.
Ill slllt Lo 11I jury: UI/employment. Class. and Polit-

;('(1/ Hespo/l se (Ca mbridge: Harvard University
Press. 1979 ). 11 5- 1 18 : an d David Bu ller and
Donald E. Stokes. Political ChOJlge in Great
Britain (New York: St. Martin's Press. 1969),
70. 77.
23 . V. O. Key. Jr., PIIIJIiCOpinion and Alllerican Democracy (New York: Knopf. 19(1 ). 122-138.

33. Nie. Verba. and Pelrocik, Tile ClwlI{jinfj Ameri-

can Vot,,; 247- 250.
34. [CPSR Nationa l Election Studies. Cumulative
Data File, 195 2- 19%.
35. The AJllerican linterprise (j anua ry/February
1999): 5 1. citin g surveys by CBS/New York
,/,i,nes .

36. Ph il ip E. Converse. "The Natu re of Bel ief Syst.ems in M(;Jss Pub lics." in Ideology (lnd Discontent. cd. David Apter (G le ncoe. II I.: Free Press.
1964),206- 261.
37. Christopher [1. Ache n, "Mass Poli tica l Attitudes a nd the Survey Response," American
Political Science Review 69 (December 1975):
12 18- 1 23 1.
38. Seymour Martin Lipset and Earl Raab, The
Politics of Unreason (New York: Harper & Row,
1970). c h. I 1 : James A. Stimson, "Belief Systems: Constrai nt. Complex ity, and the 1972
Election." Alllerican jourl/al of Political Science
19 (19 75): 393-417: and Herbert McClosky
and John Za ller. The Americml Ethos (Ca mbridge: Harvard Un iversity Press. 198 4) .
ch.8.
39. Wil liam S. Maddox and Stua rt A. Lilie. Beyond
Liberal and Conservative (Washin gton. D.C. :
Calo Institute, 19 84) . 5. 68. 96. 104 .
40. Zaller. "Information. " and Stimson. "Belief
Systems." See also Alle n II. Barton a nd R.
Wayn e Parson s. ;'Measuring Belief System

Structures." Public Opinion Quarterly 4 1
(1977): 159- ISO.

N6

Notes

4 1. Gary C. Jaco bson. "The Electoral Basis of Pa rt isan Polarization in Con gress." paper delivered a t the ann ua l meeti ng of th e America n
Politica l Scien ce Association. August 3 1- September 3.2000.
4 2. La rry M. Bartels. "Partisanship and Votin g
Behavior. 1952-1996." Amerimn JOllrnal of
Political Science 44 (2000): 35-5 0.
43. Melissa P. Collie and John Lyman Mason. "The
Electora l Connection Between Party and Constituen cy Reco nsidered: Ev iden ce from the
u.s. House of Representatives. 1972- 1994."
in COlltinllit!} and C!lOlIlIe ill House Electiolls. ed.
David W. Brady et al. (Sta nford . Ca lif. : Hoover
In stitution . 2000 ).
44. john Za ller. Tile Nature alld Origi ns of Mass
Opillioll (Ca mbridge: Cam bridge Uni versi ty
Press. 1992).
45. Lawrence R. jaco bs a nd Robert Y. Shapiro.
"Debunkin g the Myth of the Panderin g Po liticia n." Tile PlIiJlic Perspective (April / May 1997):
3-5.

Chapter 8

Political Participation

1. David Glass. Peverill Squire. a nd Ray mond
Wolfinger. "Voter Turnout: An In ternational
Comparison." PuiJlic Opillioll (Dece mbe r/
Ja nu ary 19 84): 49- 55. See also G. Bin gha m
Powell. jr.. "Voting Turn ou t in Thir ty Democracies: Partisan. Legal. and Socio-Economic
InOuen ces. " in Electoral Participation: A COIIIparative Allalusis. ed. Richard Rose (Beverly
Hills. Ca lif. : Sage Publications. 1980) .
2. Dona ld P. Green and Alan S. Gerber. Cet Out
tile Vote!: How to Increase Voter 111rnollt (Washington. D. C.: Brookings Institution. 2004).
3. Ibid .. 92.
4. Raymond E. Wolfinger and jonatha n Hoffman. "Reg isterin g and Votin g with Motor
Vot er." PS: Political Sciell ee alld Politics. 34
(March 200l ): 90.
5. Morton KeJler. AfJairs oj State (Ca mbridge:
Ha rva rd University Press. 1977). 523.
Ii. Ul lited States" Reese. 92 U.S. 214 (1871i): United States" Cruiksllallk. 92 U.s. 556 (1876): and
Ex parte Yarbroll!!lI. 110 U.S. 65 1 (] 884).
7. Cllilln and Beall v. Ullited States . 238 U.S. 347
(1915).
8. SlIIitll" Allwrigiit. 321 U.S. 649 (1944).
9. Scllnell v. Davis. 33 6 U.S. 933 (1949).
10. Ja ne Eisner. 1hkillg Back tlIe Vote: Gettillll Americoll YOlltll Ill volved ill Ollr Delll ocracu (Boston:
Beacon. 20(4). 49.
11 . Kevi n Matson. Engagillg YOllt lI: COlIIlJllllilllltlIe
Apatll!} oj YOllllg Alllericalls Toward Politics
(New York: Century Foundatio n Press. 20 03) .
2 . 4: and 2002 figures [rom U.S. Bureau of
Census data compiled by Marc Siega l.
12. Robert Putn am et al .. Better Together: I'illlli
SlIpport of the Saguaro Semillar (Ca mbridge.
Mass.: john F. Kennedy Scbool of Govern ment. Ha rvard University. 2001 ). 77: Eisner.
Tllkillil Back the Vote. ch. 5.
1 3. Pa ul Wellstone. quoted in Elizabeth Crowley.
"More Youn g People Turn Away from Politics." Wall Street JOllrllal Gune 1 Ii. 1999).

14. Putna m et al. . BeUer Togetller: Eisner. Taking
Back tlIe Vote: a nd Matson. Ellgagillg YOl/tll.
15. Historical Statistics oj IlIe United Sta tes: Colollial
Tillles to 1970. part 2.107 1- 1072.
10. Wa lter Dea n Burn h a m. "The Cha ngin g Shape
of th e A meri can Political Universe." Am erican

Political Sciencl' Review 59 (March 19 65) : 11:
and W illi am H. Flani gan and Na ncy H.

17.

I S.

19.

20.
2 1.

22.
23 .
24.

Zi n ga le. Political BelIavior of tile American
Electorate. 3d ed. (Boston: Allyn an d Bacon.
1975).15.
Burnham. "Cha n gin g Sha pe:" E. E.
Schattsc h neider. Til e Sem isovereillll People
(New York: Holt. Rin eh a rt and Winston.
1960). c hs. 5. 6.
Philip E. Converse. "Change in the America n
Electorate." in The Hlllllall Mellllillg of Socia l
Challge. ed. Angus Ca mpbell a nd Phili p E.
Converse (New Yo rk: Russell Sage Foundatio n.
1972).263-33 8.
Michael P. McDona ld and Sa muel L. Popkin.
"The Myth of the Vanishin g Voter." Alllericall
Politiral Science Review 95 (December 200 j ):
ta ble 1. 966.
Ibid.
Raymond Wolfi nger and Benjamen Highto n.
"What If They Gave a n Election and Everyone
Ca me?" Pub lic Affairs Repor t. In stitu te of
Govern mental St udies. Uni versity of California at Berkeley. jun e 1999 . 11- 13.
Ibid .. 13.
Ibid .
Sidn ey Ve rba a nd No rm a n H. Nie. Partiripation
ill Alllerica (New York: Ha rper & Row. 1972).
30. See a lso Aage R. Clau se n . "Response
Val idity: Vote Report. " PIIMic Opillioll Qllarter~. 32( 1 968- 1 9li9):58 8 -liOIi.

25. Michael W. Traugott and John P. Katosh.

26.

27.
28.
29.

30.

3 1.

32 .

" Respon se Va lidity in Su rveys of Votin g
Be havior." Pllblic Opillioll Qlla rterl!! 43 ( 1979):
359- 377: Aage R. Cla usen. "Response Valid ity: Vote Report." Pllblic Opillioll Qllarterl!J 32
(1969): 588- 606.
Sidn ey Verba et a l. . Voice alld E'IlIalit!}: Civic
Vollllltarislll ill Allierimll Politics (Ca mbrid ge:
Harvard University Press. 1995). 79.
Ibid .. 77.
Verba a nd Nie. Participatioll ill America. ch. Ii.
Lester W. Milbrath and M. I. Goel. Political Partici pation. 2d ed. (Chicago: Ra nd McN a lly.
1977): Raymond E. Wolfinger a nd Steven j.
Rosenstone. Wilo Votes? (New Have n. Conn. :
Ya le Uni versity Press. 1980): W. Ru ssell Ne uman . The Parada.\' of Mass Votillg (Cambrid ge:
Harva rd University Press. 1986). ch . 4.
Wo lfin ger and Rosenstone. Who Votes? esp.
102. a nd john P. Katosh a nd Mich ael W. Tra ugott. "Costs a nd Va lues in the Ca lculus of Votin g." Alllericoll jOl//'Ilal oj Political Science 26
(1982): 3 li l - 376.
David C. Leege and Lyman A Kellstedt. RediscoverillrJ till' Helifliolls Factor ill American Politics (Armonk . N.Y.: M. E. Sha rpe. 1993).
129- 1 31.
Verba and N ie. Pnrticipnt.iotl ill America
151 - 157: Mil brath a nd Gael. Political Participatioll . 120.

33. jack Citrin. "The Alienated Voter." Taxinll alld
Spelldilill (October 1978). 1- 7: Austin Rann ey.
"Nonvoti ng Is Not a Social Disease." I'llblie
Opinioll (October/November 1983): 16- ] 9:
Glass. Squire. a nd Wollin ger. "Vote r Turnout. "
34. Dillin v. Bllllllsteill. 405 U.S. 33 0 (1972).
35 . Wolfinger a nd Rosenstonc. WlIO Vo tes?
36. Richard G. Smolka. Il/ectioll Do!! Registratioll:
The Minnesota alld WiSCOIISill Experiellce (Washington. D.C.: American Enterprise Institut e.
1977).5.
37. Gary R. Orren. "The Linka ge of Policy to Participation." in Presidelltial Select ioll. cd .
Alexa nd er Hea rd a nd Mich ae l Nelso n
(Durham. N.C.: Duke Uni versity Press. 1987).
38. Glass. Squire. and Wolfin ger. "Voter TurnouL " 52.
39 . Powell. "Votin g Turnout": Robert W. jack ma n.
"Pol itical Institutions and Voter Turn out in
Ind ustri al Democracies ," American Politica l
Sciellce Hevie", 8 1 (1987): 4 05-423.
40. Roy Texei ra . "Will the Rea l Nonvoter Please
St.an d Up?" Pllblic Opinioll Uu ly/ August 19S8):
43: Texeira. "Registration and Turnout.·' Pub-

lic Opillioll (january/Febru a ry 1989): 12.
4 J . Ric ha rd A. Brody. "The Puzzle of Politica l Parti ci pation in America, " in The Netv American
Political S!}stelll. cd. Anthony Kin g (Was hingto n. D.C.: Ame ri can Ente rprise In stitute.
19 78): 3 J 5- 323 .
42. Ri chard Smolka. quoted in Wi ll iam ]. Crotty.
Politicn l HeJo r", alld the American Experiment
(New York : Crowell. 1977). SIi- 87.
4 3. For japan : The Society fo r Promotion of Clear
Elections. SlIr veu oj 34th Celleral Election.
1976. See Ga ry Orre n. "Politica l Pa rt icipation
a nd Public Policy: The Case l'or In sti tutio na l
Reform." Cambridge. Mass .. Nove mber 1985.
IliA. For U.S. and Sweden : Sa mu el P. Hunt in gton a nd joa n M. Nelson. No Ells,ll Choice
(Cambridge: Harva rd University Press. 19 71i).
88 .
44. Sidn ey Verba et al .. "Race. Ethnicity. and the
Resources for Participation: The Role of Reli gion." paper delivered at the 1992 a nn ual
meeting of the America n Politica l Science
Association. September 3- 6. 1992.

Chapter 9

Political Parties

1. Leon D. Epstei n. "Politica l Parties." in Halldbook of PoliUcal Sciellce. ed. Fred L Creenstein
and Nelson W. Po isby (Reading . Ma ss. :
Addison-Wesley. 1975). vo l. 4 . 23 0.
2. Quoted in He nry Adams. History of the Ullited
States oj AmericlI Ollrillg the Adlllillistratiolls oj
jeJJerson IIlId Mlldi soll . cd. Ern est Sa mu els.
abridged edition (Chi cago: Uni vers ity of
Chi cago Press. 1967). 147.
3. Wa lter Dean Burnh a m. Critical Electiolls alld
tile Mllill sprillgs of Alllericall Politics (New York:
Norton. 1970). 10.
4. James L. Sundquist. OUllalllics of IIII' Pllrly S!!Stem (Washington. D.C.: Brooki ngs In stitution.
19 73) . c h. 7.
5. Edward G. Carmines a nd james A. Stimson.
" Issue Evolution. Popu la ti on Replace men t.

Notes
and Normal Partisan Change." Americall Polit-

6.

7.

S.
9.

ical Sciellce Review 75 (Ma rch 198 1):
107- 118: and Gregory Marku s. "Po li tical
Allitudes in a n Election Year." Amerim ll PoliUcell Sciellce Review 76 (Se ptember J 9S2):
53S- 560.
Ray Wolfinger a nd Michael G. Hagen. " Republica n Prospects: Southern Comfort." Pllblic
Opillioll (October/November 1985): 8- 13. But
co mparc Richard Scammon and james A.
Ba rnes. "Republica n Prospects: Southern Discomfort. " Public Opillioll (October/ November
19S5): J 4- J 7.
jerold G. Rusk. "The Errect or the Australian
Ba ll ot Refo rm on Split-Ticket Vo tin g:
IS 76- 190S." Americall Political Sciellce Review
64 ())ecember 1970): 1220- 1238.
Morto n Keller. AlJairs of State (Cambridge:
Ha rvard University Press. 1977). 239 .
Quoted in Keller. ibid .. 250.

JO. Martin Shefter, "Parties, Burea ucracy. and

I I.

12.

13 .

14.
15.

J 6.

17.
18.

J 9.
20.

21.

22.

23.

Politica l Change in the United States." in '/'J le
Developmellt of Political Parties. Sage Electora l
Studies Yearbook. vol. 4. cd. Loui s Maisel and
joseph Cooper (Beverly Hills. Ca lif. : Sage.
1975).
ja mes Q. Wilson . The Amateur Democrat: Club
Politics ill Three Cities (Chicago: Un iversity of
Chicago Press. 1962).
Sam uel j. Eldersveld. Political Parties: A /3ellllvioral Allalysis (Chicago: Rand McNa lly. 19(4).
278.287.
Robert H. Sa lisbury. "The Urban Party Orga ni" ltion Member," Public Opillioll Qlllu-terly 29
(Winter 1965- 1966): 550- 564.
Ibid .. 557. 559.
E1dersveld . Political Parties: a nd j. David Greenstone. Labor ill Americall Politics (New York:
Knopf. J 969). 187.
David R. May hew. Placillg Parties ill Americal/
Politics (Prin ceton. N. j.: Princeton University
Press. 1986). chs. 2. 3.
/30StOIl Globe Uuly 9. 1984): 1.
Wi ll ia m isbet Chambers and Walter Dean
Burnham. eds.. The Americall Party Systellls:
Stages of Political Developlllellt, 2d ed. (New
York: Oxford Un iversity Press. 1975). 6.
Willialll s v. Hhodes. 3 9 3 U.S. 23 (] 968).
james Q. Wi lso n. Political Orgallizatiolls (New
York: Basic Books. 19 73). ch. 12: a nd Sa mu el
Stouffer. COIIIIllllI/i sll/. COllforlllit!]. alld Civil
Liberties (Ga rd en City. N.Y.: Doubleday.
J 955).
Updated rrom jea ne Kirkpatrick. The New Presidelltial elite (New York: Russell Sage Foundation and Twentieth Century Fund . 1976).
297- 315.
Nelson W. Polsby. COllseqllellcesof Part!) Ilefonll
( ew York: Oxrord University Press. 19 83).
9- 11. 64.
Ibid .. J 58. But compare john G. Geer. "Votin g
in Presidentia l Primaries." paper delivered to
the 1984 annua l meeting of th e American
Politi ca l Science Association,

24. Center for the Study or the American Electorate. April 2000.

25. Michael j. Malbin . "Democratic Party Ru les
Are Made to Be Broken." Na tiollal 10 11 mal
(August 23. 1980): j 388.

17, Morris I~ Piorina . Retrospective Voting ill Amer-

18.
Chapter 10

Elections and Campaigns

I. Wes fJerry v. Sal/ders. 376 U.S. J (.1 964).
2. Richard F. Fenno. jr. "U.S. House Members and
Their Constitu encies: An Ex ploration. " AllleriCl/II Political Sciellce Heview 71 (September
1977): 883- 9] 7. esp. 914.
3. john A. Ferejohn . Pork /3I11Tel Politics (Stanro rd. Ca lif. : Stanlo rd University Press. 1974).
4. Douglas A rn old. Congress (II/{I tl w Burcmu;mC:lj
(New Haven. Conn .: Ya le Uni versity Press.
1979).
5. Fred Barnes. "Charade on Main Street." The
New Republic Uune 15. 198 7): 15- 1 7. Sec a lso
Hugh Winebrenner. 1'he 10IVl/ Precillct Callcllses: The M_ak;"g oJ (l Meliia Eve"t (A mes: Iowa
State Un iversity Press. 19 87).
6 . Arth ur H. Miller et a l.. "A Majority Party in
Disa rray: Policy Polarization in the 1972 Election. " Alllericall Political Sciell ce Review 70
(19 76) : 757.
7. Don a ld E. Stokes a nd joh n j. Dilulio. jr..
"Valence Politics in Modern Elections." in The
1992 Electiolls. ed. Michael j. Nelson (Washin gton. D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Press.
1993). ch . 1.
8. Michael Ke lley. "The Making or a First Fa mily:
A Blu eprint. " New York '/Jllles (November 14.
1992): 1. 9.
9. Ibid .
J O. Thomas E. Patterso n and Robert D. McClure.
Til e Unseeing Hye: TIle Nfyl" oj Television Power
ill Nl/tiolll/l Politics (Ne w York: Putnam.
1976): and Xandra Kayden. Ca ll1pl/igll Oryl/lliZIltiOIl (Lexi ngton . Mass.: D. C. i1eath.19 78).
ch .6.
j 1. Gerald M. Pomper et al .. The Jilectioll of 1980
(Chath am. N.j.: Chatha m House. 1981). 75.
105- 107.
12. Pllblic Opillioll Stratel/ies: Alllericl/ll MOllitor
(November 20(4).
J 3. Gary C. jacobson. The Politics of COllareSSiOIll/1
Electiolls. 2d cd. (Boston: Little. Brown. J 987).
4 9.
14. ))ona ld Philip Green and jonathan S. Krasno.
"Sa lvation for the Spendthrift In cum be nt:
Reestimatin g the Effects of Cam pai gn Spendin g in House Electio ns." Alllericall jOllmol of
Political Sciellce 32 (1988): 884- 960: Stephen
Ansolabehre. "Winning Is Easy but It Sure
Ain ' t Cheap." Working Paper 90- 1. Cen ter ror
American Politics a nd Public Policy. UCLA.
1990: Robert S. Erickson a nd Thomas R.
Pa lfrey. "The Puzzle of Incumbent Spending
in Congressional Elections," Social Science
Work ing Paper 806. Ca liforn ia Institute or
Technology. August 1992.
15. Angus Ca mpbell. Phi lip E. Converse. Warren
E. Mi ller. and Donald E. Stokes. The Alllericoll
Voter (New York: Wiley. 1960). ch . 8.
16. V. O. Key. jr.. TI le Hespollsible EJectorate (Ca mbridge: Harva rd University Press. 19(6).

N7

19.

20.

2 I.
22.

icall Natiollal EJectiolls (New Haven. Conn .:
Ya le University Press. 198 1).
jay P. Greene. "Forewarned Berore Forecast:
Presiden tial Election Forecastin g Models and
the 1992 Election." I~ S.: PolitiCllI Sciellce I/lld
Polities (March J 993): 20.
Pau l Freedman and Ken Goldstein. "Measuring Media Exposure and the Effects of Negative Ca mpai gn Ads." Americl/II jOllmal of
Political Seiellce 43 (October .199 9):
1189- J 208.
Robert Axelrod. "Where the Votes Co me
From: An Analysis of Electoral Coa litions.
1952- 1968." Americall Political Sciellce Review
66 (1972 ): 11- 20 : and Axelrod. "Communication." Americall Po/iUeal Sciellce Review 68
(19 74): 718-7.19 .
Gerald M. Pomper. Electiolls ill America (New
York : Dodd. Mead. 1971).178 .
Benjam in Gin sberg. "Elections and Public Policy," America n Politi cal Science Review 70
(Ma rch J 976): 41-49.

Chapter 11

Interest Groups

1. L. Har mon Zeigl er a nd Hendrik van Da len.
"I nterest Gro ups in the States," in Polities
ill tile AmeriClIII States. ed. Herbert jacob
and Kenneth N. Vines. 2d cd. (Boston: Lillie.
Brow n . 1974). 122- 160 : Edward C. Ba nfield
a nd james Q. Wilso n . City Polities (Ca mbridge: Harvard University Press. J 963). chs.
18. J 9.
2. joseph LaPa lombara. Illterest Groups ill /taliall
Politics (Prin ceton. N.j .: Prin ceton University
Press. 1964).
3. Kay Lehman Schlozman and john T. Tierney.
"More of the Same: Washington Pressure
Gro up Activity in a Decade or Change." jOllrlIalof Politics 45 (1983): 356.
4 . The use or injunctions in labor disputes was
restricted by th e or ris-LaGuardi a Act or
J 932: the rights to collective barga inin g and
to the union shop were gua ranteed by the
Wagner Act or 1935.
5. Historical Statistics of tile Ullited States. Colollial
Tim esLo 1970. vo l. 1. 386.
6. The d istinction is drawn Irom Kay Lehman
Sch lozman and john '1'. Tierney. Orgallized
IlI terests I/Ill/ Americall Democracy (New York:
Harper a nd Row. 198 5).
7. jelTrey M. Berry. Til e Illterest GrollP Society
(Boston: Lillie. Brown. 1984) . 20- 21 .
8. Ibid .. 24. 130.
9. GabrielA. Almond and Sidney Verba. Tile Civic
ClIltllre (Princeton. N.j.: Princeton University
Press. 1963). 302: Derek C. Bok and john T.
Dun lop. Lalior allll ti,e Americall Comll'''''ity
(New York: Simon and Sch uster. ] 970). 49: Statisti{;(ll Alistract of tile Ullited States. 1975 . 373.
10. Almond and Verba. Til e Civic Cllltlire. J 94 .
11. Ibid .. 207 .
12. Mancur Olson. jr.. 'l'll e Logie of Col/ective Actioll
(Cambridge: Harvard Uni versity Press. 1965).
15 3- 157.

Notes

N8

13. Ellen Na kas him a. "Study: Con tra cts Given to
Repeat Vio lators." Washillgtoll Post (May 7.
2(02): A 19.
14. Bok and Dunlop. LabO/: 134.
15. Jane ). Mansbridge. Why We Lost the eRA (Chi cago: University of Chicago Press. 1986). ch . IO.
16. Joyce Ge lb a nd Marian Lief Pa lley. WOlll ell alld
Public Choices (P rin ceton . N.j .: Princeton University Press. 1982). ch. 3; /0 Freem an. The
Politics of WOlll ell 's Liberation (New York:
Mc Kay. 1975 ). ch. 3: Maren Lockwood Ca rden. "The Proliferation of a Socia l Moveme nt:
Ideology and Individuallocentives in the Contemporary Feminist Movement." Hesrarch ill
Socilll Movelllellts 1 (19 78) : 1 79- 196: and Dom
Bonafede. "Sti ll a Long Way to Go." Nlltiollal
JOllmal (September 1 3. 1986): 2 1 75-2 179.
17. Statistical AbstraL·t of the Ullited States. 2000 .
445: Mansbridge. Why We Lost. 130- 13 1.
18. Jeffrey M. Berry. Lobb!lill!Jfor tlw People (Princeto n . N.J.: Prin ceton Uni versity Press. 1977).

7 1-76 .
19. Berry. Illterest GrollI' Society. 88.
20. Genera l Acco untin g Office (GAO). Mllllllging
for Hesllits (Was hin gton. D.C.: GAO-0 1-592 .
2(01 ). 10: UlllewlPlayillg Field: Harriers to Parlicipatiotl

by Fail.II- Based and

COlllllllmily Org(lIli-

i" I''eelemi S'ocial Service Delivery ProgrctlllS
(Was hi ngton. D.C.: Wh ite House Office of Fa itbBased and Community Initiatives. August
2(01).
Ulllevei Playill1/ Field. op. cil.
Ibid .. and Jo hn J. Di lu lio. Jr.. "Government-ByProx y : A Failhrul Overview." I-Iar vard Law
Heview 11 6. no. 5 (March 2(03): 1274.
Sc hl ozman and T ierney. Ol'lJllllized Illterests
alld Alllcrimll Delllocrac!!. table 5-4.
Nell' York Tillles (December 8. 19 83): I .
Raymond A. Bauer. lthiel de So la Pool. and
Lewi s A nth ony Dex ter. America" BIISil1css
ali(I Pllblic Polic!! ( ew York: At. hert.o n . 19( 3) .
ch. 30.
Berry. Lobbyillgfor th e People. 136- 140.
Margaret Ann Latus. ·J\.ssessin g Ideolog ica l
PACs: From Outrage to Understa nding." in
Malle!! alld Politics ill tile Ullited Slat.es. cd.
Michael j. Malbin (Chatham . N.,.: Chatham
House. 19 84). 14 3: data supplied by th e Federal Election Comm ission. March 1992.
Latus. Assessill!l. 144 .
Ma lbin. MOlle!l 01111 Politics. table /\ .8. 29(}-29l.
Mic h ae l J. Ma lbin . "Looking Back at the
ZUUOI IS

2 J.
22.

23 .

24.
25 .

2 6.
2 7.

28.
29.
30.

Future of Ca mpai gn Finan ce Reform: Interest

Gro ups and Ameri ca n Electi o ns." in Malbin.
Malle!! alld Politics. 248: James B. Kau a nd
Paul II. Hubin. COlllJI'eSSlllell. COllstitllellls olld
COIII.ri/m IDr., (Bosto n: Martinus Nijh ofr. 19 8 2 ):
Ilenry W. Chappell. Jr.. "Campaign Contribution s an d Votin g on the Cargo Preference Bill:
A Comparison of Simulta neo us Models." Pllblie Choice 36 ( 1981): 301-3 12: W. P We lch.
"Ca mpaig n Contributions and Votin g: Milk
Money and Dairy Price Supports." Westerll
Politicrli Qllarterl!! 3 5 (1982 ): 478-495: John
R. Wri g ht. '·PACs. Contributi o ns. and Ro ll
Call s: An Organ izational Perspective." Amcri-

Political Sc iell ce Hev iew 79 ( 1985 ):
400-4 14. But co mpare Benja m in Cin sberg
and John C. Green. "The Best Cong ress Money

!'nil

Ca n Buy," in Do H/l'CtiOllS l\IlaUer? cd. Benjamin Ginsberg and A la n Ston e (A rmonk .
N.V.: M. E. Sharpe. 1986).75- 89.

3 1. William T. Go rml ey. 'J\. Test of the Hevolving
Doo r I ly pothesis at the FCC," AlIIericall JOlll'l/al
of Political Sciellce 23 ( 1979): 665-683 : Pau l
J. Quirk. IlIdllstry 11Ij1I1('l/Ce ill Federal He!Jlllatory
Agel/cies ( Princeton. N.J.: Pri nceton University

Press. 198 I ): Jeffrey E. Cohen . "The Dy na mics
of the 'Revolvin g Door' o n the FCC." AlIIericoII
JOllrllal of Political Scielll:e 3 0 (1986): 689-708.
32. Suzanne Weaver. Decision to Prosecute (Cambridge. Mass.: MIT Press. 19 77) .154-16 3.
33 . Ull ited States v. Harriss. 347 U.S. 612 (19 54) .
34. Ull ited Slates Code. Title 26. section 501 (c)(3).

Chapter 12

The Media

I . Kar in Deutsch Karl eka. cd . Freedolll of I.he Press
2004 (New York: Freedom Ho use. 20(4).
2. David E. Butler. "Why Ameri ca n Pol iti ca l
Reporting Ls Beller Than England·s. " I/mper's
(May 19(3): 1 5- 25 .
3. Nell' York Tillles Ua n uary 28 . 19 74).
4. Douglass Ca ter. Ti, e HJllrl.h 13rallch of GovallIl/ellt (Bosto n : Ii ought o n Mifl'lin . 19 59). 76 :
and William L. Rivers. "The Press as a Communicati o n System." in l/(lIIdlJOok of COllllllIIlIiC(ltioll. ed. Ithie l de Sola Pool et al. (Chi ca go:
Rand Mc a lly. 1973).522- 52 6 .
5. Quoted in F. L. Mort. Al1Ierica" jOl/r"alisl1I.
11i9!}- 1960. 3d cd. (Ne w York: Macmi lla n .
1962).529.
6. Cente r I'or Media a nd Public Afl'airs. "The
Incredible Shrin king Sound Bite." Press Release.
Washington. D.C .. September 28. 2000.
7. U.S. Censu s Bureau. 1/0IlI e COlllplll ers alld
IlI l.ertlei Use ill tile Ullited States: AUgllSt 20()()
(Was h ington. D. C.: Census Bureau. 2001 ).

18. Ibid .. 177.
19. Ga llu p Poll. February 2003: Pew Research Center for the Peo ple a nd the Press poll. July 200 3.
20. Wil liam G. Maye r. "Why Talk Radi o Is Conserva tive." The Puhlie Illterest (S ummer 20(4):
86- 103.
2l. David W. Brady and j onathan Ma. "Spot the
Differen ce." Wall Streel Jourllal ( ovember 12.
20( 3) .
22. Lic h ter. Ro thm an. and Lic hter. Media Elile.
2 3 . Joh n I~. Lotl. Jr.. and Kev in A. Hassetl. "I s
Newspaper Cove ra ge of Econo mi c Events

Po litica lly Biased?" unpublis hed paper. American Enterprise Instit.ute (Se ptember 1. 2(04).
Sec also Tim Groseclose and j eff Milyo.
"A Meas ure of Med ia Bia s." unpubli sh ed
paper. Department or Po liti ca l Scien ce. UCLA
(Sept ember 2(03).
24. David Okrent. "Is the ew York Times a Liberal
Ne wspaper?" Nelli York 'I'illles Uuly 25 . 2(04).
25 . David O. Scars a nd Ri c hard E. Whitney, "Poli tic,1I Persuasion. in Pool. J ImllflJook of Com m/lOf

llicatiOIl. 253-28 9.
26. RobertS. Eri ckson. "The Innuence of Newspaper Endorsements in Presidential Elections:

T he Case of 1964." AllIericall jOlll'llaJ of PoliUcal Science 20 (May 19 76): 207- 233 .
27. Kim Fridkin Kahn a n d Patri ck J. Kenn ey. "The
Slant of the ews: How Editorial Endorsements In fluence Ca mpai gn Coverage and Citizens' Views of Candid ates." AllIeriellll Political
SciellceRevieIV96 (2002): 38 1- 394.
28 . Maxwe ll E. McCombs a nd Do na ld R. Shaw.
"The Agenda Setting Fun cLi on or th e Mass

29.

30.

H. Edward lilY Epstei n. News!rolll Nowhere: Televi-

sioll IIlId tile News (New York: Random Ho use.
19 73) . 37.

9. Near v. Millllesota. 283 U.S. 697 ( 19 3 1).
10. New York 'fillies v. Ullited States. 403 U.S. 7 1 3
( 19 7 1).
II. New York Tillles v. SIII/ivall. 37 6 U.S. 254 (1964).
12 . Mi!lllli Herald PublisllillY Co. v. 'I'orllil/o. 4 18
U.S. 24 1 (19 74).
13. Yatesv. UlliledStates. 354 U.S. 298 ( 1957).
14. I3mllZlJllry" Ha!!es. 408 U.S. GG5 ( 1972).
15 . Zurcher v. Siallford Dail!!. 4 3 G U.S. 547 ( 1978).
overturn ed by the Privacy Protection Act of
198 0 (PL. 96--440).
16. S. Robert Lichter. Stanley Rot hman. and Linda
S. Lichter. Th e Media Elite (Bethesda. Md.:
Adler and !\eller. 1986): Sta nley Rothman and
Amy Black. "Elites Revisited: America n Socia l
and Po litical Leadership in the 1990s." lil t('/'/wUollal JOIlr/wl of Pllhlie OpilliOIl Hesmrcll 1 I
( 1999): 169-195: William Schn eider an d
I. A. Lewis. "Views on th e Ne ws." Puhlic OpilliOIl (Au gust/ September 1985) : 7.
17. Rothman and Black. "Elites Revisited." 182 .

3 I.

32.

Media." Puhlic Opillioll Qllarterl!l 36 (S ummer
] 972): 17G- 187: Shanto Iy nega r a nd Dona ld
R. Kinder. News Thill. MaUers (C hicago: Uni vers ity of Ch ica go Press. 198 7).
G. Ray Funkhouser. "The Issues of the Sixt ies. " Puhlie Opillioll Quar/erly 37 (S prin g
1973): 62- 75.
Benjamin I. Page. Robert. Y. Shapiro. and
Glen n R. Dempsey. "What Moves Public Opin ion '" AllIericall Political Sciellce Review 81
(March 1987) : 23--43: Benjami n I. Page. "The
Media as Politica l Actors." PS: Political Sciellce
alld Politics (Ma rc h 1996): 2 1.
George Jergens. "Th eod o re Roosevelt and
the Press." Daedaills (Fa ll 1982): 1] 3- 133:
Ilenry Fairlie. "The Rise of the Press Secretary."
Ti,e Nell' lleplliJIic (March 18. 1978): 20-2 3.
lichael J. Robinson. 'J\. Twentieth Centu ry
Medium in a Nineteenth Cen tury Legislature:
The ElTecls of Television on the Ameri can Congress." in Co1lfJress i1l

Chanye. ed. N orman I.

Ornstein (New York: Praeger. 19 75) : 240- 26 1.
33 . Pew Research Cenler for t.h e People a nd the
Press. "M edia Seen as Pair. But Ti ltin g to
Gore." Press Release. Was hin gton . D. C.. October J 5. 2000.
34. Center for Media and Public Affairs. "Public to
Press: Keep in Touch!. " Press Relea se. Wa shington. D.C .. 1996.
35. Pew Center I'or the People and the Press. "Terror Coverage Boost

cws Media's Images,"

Press Release. November 28. 200 I.

Notes
36 . Wi ll Lester. "1'011: [nt erest in Ne ws Stab ilizes."
Th e M(feol/ Telegraph (J un e 9 . 2 0 02) .

Chapter 13

Congress

]. Con ti nu ity of Government Commissio n. Preservil/g 0 1/1' II/sti tl/ tiolls: Tile COlllil/l/ity oj COIIWess (Wash in gton. D.C.: Ameri can Enterprise
Institute a nd Brookings Institutio n. May 200 3).
2. H. Do u glas Price. "Careers a n d COIl1.m iUees ill
th e Ameri ca n Con gress." in 1'he /-listory oj ParUa lll l!l1l(/ r,11 l3elwviOl; cd. \l\1ill iam 0. Aydelotte
(Princeton. N,J.; Princeton Un iversily Press.
1977) . 2S- 02 : john F. Bibby. T ho mas E. Mann.
and Norman j. Ornste in . \lit(fl StnUstics 0 1/ COI/-

16. No rm a n j. Orn stein . Tho ma s E. Man n. a n d
Mich ael j. Ma lbin. \lita l Statistics 0 11 COIIWess.
1995- 1996 (Was hin gto n . D.C. : Con g ressional Quarterly Press . 1996). 199-200.
17. Ga ry C. jacobson. "The Electora l Basis or Par ti san Pola ri 7.a lion in Con g ress." paper de li vered
a llhe annual meeting of t he Ameri ca n Politica l Scien ce Assoc ia ti o n . Au gust 3 1- September
3. 2002: Larry M. Bar tels. " Pa rtisa nshi p and
Vot ing Behavior. 1952- 1996." Alll er iCIIII jOll rlI(JloJ PolitiCIII Sciellce 44 (2000): 35-50 .
l8. Ma rc J. [Ietherington. "Resurgent Mass Pa rtisanship:The Role or Elite Polarization ," AII/cri('nil PoliliC!JI Sciellce Review 9 5 (200 I ): 6 19- 03 1.
19. Keith T. Poole a nd Iloward Rose nthal. COIIWess:

{tn'ss. 1980 (Wa s hin g to n . D.C. : A me ri ca n

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

S.

Y.

10 .

1l.

1 2.

13.

l4.

15 .

Enter pri se Insti tut e. 1980). 53-54: Th o mas E.
Cavan au gh . "The Dispersio n or Auth o ri ty in
the I-lo use o f Represe nt at ives." Poliliml Sciellce
QI/(Jrterly 97 ( 19S2- 1 n3): 625- 626: COI/gressiol/(J I QI/nr lerly Week ly Heports.
Da vid R. May h ew. COl/Wess: The Hteelo ml COII lIectiOl/ (New I-Iaven . Conn.: Yale Unive rsi ty
Press. 1974 ): Bibby. Mann. an d Orn stein . \lit(J1
Stntistics. 14- 15.
May h ew. COl/gress: Mor ris P. Fiorin a . COl/Wess:
Keystolle oj the Was hil/!Itoll Est(Jblishlllel/ t (Ne w
Haven . Conn.: Yale Uni ve rsity Press . 19 77) .
Rb odes Cook. " Ho use Re publican s Scored a
Quiet Victo ry in '92 ." COl/!!ressiolllll QI/(J rterly
(April 17. 1993): 966.
Bruce E. Cain a nd Dav id But ler. " Redra wi n g
Dist r ict Lin es: W h at 's Goin g On and Wh a t's a t
Stake." Th e Alll ericmJ EI/terprise (j uly/A u g ust
199 1): 37 .
Wa lte r Dea n Burnham. as qu oted in Fred
Barnes. " Reali g nlllen t. Now Mo re 'I'ha ll Eve r,"
Th e Weekly SlIlIId(J rd (Nove mber 22.2004): l l.
Wa r ren E. Mille r and Dona ld E. Stokes. "Constituen cy Influ e n ce in Con g ress." in Electiolls
(Jlld Iile Politica l Ordel: cd. Ang us Cam pbell et
a l. (New Yo rk : Wiley. 1966). 359 .
John E. Jackson. COl/ sUuw/l cies and Leaders ill
COl/ gress (Ca mb ri d ge : Harva rd Un ive r si ty
Press. 1974).
jer ro ld E. Sch neider. Ideolollical CO(Jlitions ill
COllgress (West por t. Conn .: Greenwood Press.
1979).134. 195.
Mich ae l Foley. Tile NelV Sena te: Li/)era l Inj7l1ellce
011 a COllservative InstiLl/lioll . 1 959- 1972 (New
Haven. Conn.: Ya le nive rsi ty Press. J 980).
242.
Tim Groseclose. Steven D. Lev itt. and ja mes M.
Snyde r. j r.. "Compa r ing In teres t Gro up Scores
Ac ross Time a n d Ch a m bers." A llleriL'!lIl Politica l Sciellce Review 93 (19 99): 33- 50 .
COllw essiollnl Qllarterly Weekly Report. (Dece m ber 3. 1994): 3430-3435.
[n 1993 t h e 103d Con g ress a lso co ntain ed a
lot of newly elected Dem ocra ti c me mber s
eager to ch a n ge House rules. They voted fo r
th e o ld rul es and procedures. h owever. because
th a t is w halth eir party lead ers wanted.
Barbara Sincla ir. Th e Trnll sJorlllntio ll oj tile
Ulli ted St.(J tes Sella te (Ba ltimore: j o hn s Hopkins
Uni versi ty Press. 1989).

Hall Cnll \lOtill!!
( ewYork: Ox lo rd Un iversity Press. 1997).8.
No la n McCa rty. Keit h T. Poole. an d Il oward
Rose nth a l. "The Ilun t l'or Party Discipl ine in
Con g ress ." A11Ierinl/1 Poli tical Sciellce /{('v icw
95 . no. 3 (Se ptember 2 00 l): 086.
Susan Webb Hammon d. "Congressional Ca ucuses in th e 104th Con g ress." in COllllre"
Recoll sidered. ed. Lawre n ce C. Dodd and Bruce
I. Oppe nhe imer. 6th cd. (Washi n gto n . D.c.:
Con gressio n a l Quarterly Press. 199 7). 6.
Ibid .. 34 .
Sleven S. Smith . " Revoluti on in the House:
W hy ])o n 't We Do It o n t he Floo r?" d isc ussio n
paper no. 5. Broo ki ngs insti tuti on. Was h in gton. D.C .. Septem ber 1986.
Ri chard F Fenno. Jr.. COllgresslllell ill COllllllit tees (Bosto n : Little. Brown . 1973).
Mic h ael j. Ma lbin. " De lega ti on . Delibe rati o n.
an d t he New Ro le of Co n g reSSio n a l Sta ll " in
Tile New COllUrl'ss. ed. T homas Eo Mann and
or ma n j. Orn ste in (Wa sh in gto n . D.C. : A merican En ter prise Ins titute. 198 1 ). 134- 177.
esp. ] 70- 1 7 I.
Law rence II. Ch a mberl a in. "The Preside nt.
Congress. and Legislation, " in '/'h (' Preside/ le!j.
cd. Aaron Wil da vs ky (Bos to n: Lillie. Brown .
1969).444-445: Ro n a ld C. Moe a nd Steve n
C. Teel. "Congress a s a Po licy-Ma ker: A Necessary Reappra isa l. " PoliUcal Science QlIarterly
85 (Septem ber ] 970 ): 443-470.
Rich a rd E. Cohen. "Cha llengin g th e lI o use's
Tram c Cop. " NI/l.iolll/l JOIlJ'JJal (Apr il 4 . 1993):
1002 .
Th omas E. Ma nn a nd Nor m an j. Ornstei n .
HellelVill!1 COllwess: A Secolld Report (Was h ingto n . D.C.: A m erica n Ente r prise Ins tit u le.
1993).49.
Ma lcolm E. jewell a nd Samu el C. Pa tte rso n.
Th e Legislati ve Process ill tile Ull ited SlfItes. 3d
cd . (New York: Ra ndo m [-l o use. 1977).439 .
Na Li on al Commission on Ter ro ri st A ttacks
Upo n th e Un ited States. The 9111 COIII lJl issiOIl
Heport: Fill(J1 Hepart oj the Natiollal COlJllllissiOIl
Oil Terrorist Al[{Jcks UPOII the Ull ited States
( ew Yo rk a nd Lo n do n: WW No rto n & Co mpa ny. 2 ( 04). 420.
A Polilicnl Ecollolllic Ilistory oj

20.

2 1,

22 .
23 .

24.
25.

26.

27 .

28 .

29.

30.

3 1.
32.
33.
34.

Ibid .
Ibid .. 4 19.
Continu ity or Govern me nt Commissio n . 2.
Ibid .. 3.4.

Chapter 14

N9

The Presidency

1 . jea n Blo nd el. All IlI trodllCtiOIl to COlllpl/mtive
Go VerJIlllell t (New Yo rk: Praeger. 1969). as
cited in Ne lso n W Polsby. "Legislatures." in
1-llIlIdbook oj Polil ielll SciCII('e. cd. Fred I. Gree nstein a n d Nelson W Polsby (Readin g. Mass.:
Addiso n-Wesley. 1975). vo l. 5. 275.
2 . Do nald F. Kett I. Deficit Polilics: Pll blic Blld!]eti llil
ill Its IlIstit ll t ioll(J1 alld lIistoriell l COli text (New
Yo rk : Macm ill a n . 1992). 13.
3. Mor r is P. Fior ina. Divided Governl1lent (New
York: Macmill an. 1992). 86-11l.
4. David May hew. Divided We Govern: Party COI1trol. Ln"'lII lIki llg. IIl1d IlIvesti!](Jtiolls. 1946- 1990
(New Ha ven . Co nn .: Ya le Uni ve rsity Press.
1991).76.
5. Ma r k A. Pelerson . tellislllUllg Together: Th e
White HOllse alld COllgress Jrolll Eisellhower to
Heaga/l (Camb ridge: Ha rva rd Un ive rsity Press.
1990).
0. Ri ch a rd E. Cohen . Wasllingt.on at Work: B(Jck
Hoollls (fI/(1 Cleall Air (New York: Macm ill an.
1992). 1 54-1 55.
7. Ibid .. 169.

8. Keltl. Deficit PoliUts. 138.
9. Wood row Wil so n. COll fl ressioHal Gover"ment

10.

11.

1 2.

1 3.
.1 4 .

(New Yo rk : Merid ian Books. 1950). 167- 168.
170. (First published in 1885.)
Slepil e n I less . Orlla llizillil the Prl'sid('JIC!J
(Was h in gto n . D.C.: Brooki n gs Ins tituti o n .
1970).3: R. W Apple. "Clin ton's Reloc us ing."
New York TilJl es (May 0. 1993): 1\22 : Michael
K. Fri sby. " Power Swit c h ." Wall St.reel jOllmal
(Ma rc h 26. 1993) : A I . A7.
Dav id T. Stan ley et a l. . Mell W ho Gllvnll
(Was hin gton. D.C.: Brooki n gs tn s titu tion.
1967).4 1-42.50.
Da ni el j. Elaza r. "Wh ich Road to t he Presidency?" in The Presidency. cd. Aa ro n Wi ldavsky
(Bosto n : Little. Brow n . J 969). 340 .
Ric h a rd E. Neusta dt. Presidell tial PaIVa rev. cd.
(New York: Wi ley. 1976). ch . 4.
Wa lter D. Bu rnh a m . " In sul a ti on a nd Res po n siveness in Congr essional Elections." Political
Sciellce Qllarterly 90 (Pall 197 5): 4 1 2- 4 13:
George C. Ed wards III. Presidential 11Ij7l1ellce ill
CO llwess (Sa n Fra n cisco : Free man . 1 98 0 ).
70-7S : War re n E. Mi ll er. "Presidentia l Coatta ils: A Stu dy in Po litica l Myth and Melh odo logy." Pllblic Opillioll Qllar terly 19 (Wi n te r
1955- 1950) : 368: and Miller. "The Mot ivati onal Bas is l'or St ra igh t and Split Ticket Vo ting." J\ merican Polilia d Science Nevicw 51 (j u ne
1957): 293-3 12.

15. Clillt.oll v. City of New York. 1] 8 S.Ct. 2 0 9 1
( 1998).
16. Marb llry v. M(J(/isoll. I Cra ndl 1 37 ( t 803).
1 7. Ullited States v. Nixoll . 4 18

.S. 683 ( 1974).

18. Clill toll v. j Olles. 520 U.S. 6S I ( 1997): III Re
Gmlld j llry SlI bpoella DII('es TecIIIJI. I 12 F.3d
9 10 (1997): ill He Sealed Case. 12 1 F. 3d 729

(1997) .
1 9. Marc us Cunli ffe. Alll eriCfl Il Presidelli s alld the
Presidellcy (New York: A m erica n Heritage
Press/ McGraw- HilI. 1972 ). 63. 65.

NIO

Notes

2 0 . Ibid .. 2 14.
2 1. Adapled from Pau l C. Light. 'I'llI' Pres idellt"s
/\flellda (Ba ltimore. Md.: Jo hns Hopkin s University Press. 19S2). 2 I 7-22 5.

Chapter 15

The Bureaucracy

I . Ch a rl es E. Lindblom. Politics nIId Market.s (New
York: Basi c Books. 1977). 11 4.
2 . Article II. secti o n 2. para. 2.
3. Article II . section 3.
4. Calculated from data in Historica l .'>lOlisl irs of
Ille Ullil ed Stlll es: Colo llial 'I'illll'S 10 1'J7()
(Was h in gto n . D.C.: Gove rnm e nt Prinli n g
Office. 19 75). vo l. 2. 1102- 110 3.
5. PIIIl!llIIn Refl llilllJ Co. v. N!]I11/' 2,} 3 U.S . 3HH
(19 3 5 ).
6. Hnlllptoll II: [, Co. v Ull ited SIllies. 276 U.S. 394
(1928) .
7. Edward S. Corwin . 'I'lle COllstillltiOIl alld Wllal II
M ealls Today. 1 3th cd. (prin ceto n . N.J.: PrinceIon Univers ity Press. 19 73) . 15 1.
S. Bruce D. PorLer. "Parkinson 's Lel\·v Revisited:
War and the Crowth
Ameri can Govcfn menl. " Pllb/ic IlIl eresl (S umm er 19S0): 50- 68.
Y. Sec the cases ci ted in Con v in. TI,e COI ISlitlll io/1. 8.
10 . U.S. SlIIllItes. vo l. 154. sec. 799 ( 1970).
I I. llislorica l SlaUsUrs oJ Ow Ullited Si ai es. vo l. 2.
1 107.
12 . Dona ld F. Ketti et. a l.. Civil Service R(jo,., lI:
Hili/dillY 1I Govenl/1l('11[ 'I'll(/( \l\lorks (\l\IashingIo n. D.C.: Brook in gs Inslitution. 19 96). 18.
1 3. Ibid .. 15.
14. lI u g h lI eclo. " Iss ue Networks and th e Executive Establishment." in Tile N ew Alllerimll Polit-

or

iml Systelll . cd. Antho ny King (Wa shin gton .

15 .

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.
22.

D.C.: American Enterprise In stitute. 19 78).
S7-1 24.
Quoted in Hugh Hecla. A Covalllllelli oJ
Siml/gers (Was hin gton. D.C.: Brook in gs Instit Uli on. 19 77). 225.
Alexis Si mendin ger. "or t he Peo ple. fo r Ih e
People. " Naliol/{i/ 101ll"llal (A pri l I X. 1998):
852-855. Dala fro m th e Pew Charitable Trusts
Research Cenl er for th e Peo ple and th e Press.
Stanley Ro thman and S. RobeI'I Li cht e r.
"' low Liberal Arc Bureaucrats?" Hi'{J llialio"
(NovemberlDecember. 1983): 17- 1X.
Kenn eth Meier and Lloyd Nig ro. "Representative Burea u cra cy and Po licy References: A
Study of th e 1\IIi1ud es of Federa l Executives."
PlIlJlic Adlllillisimtioll !levielV 36 (July / Au g ust
19 76): 45S-467: Bernard Mennis. AII/aim ll
1'(,reiIJI/ Polic!! OfJkillls (Co lumbus: Oh io State
Uni vers ity Press . 197 1).
Joe l D. Aberba e h and Be rt A. Rock man.
"Cla s h in g Beliefs Within t h e Execut ive
Branch: Th e Nixon Admini stratio n Bureaucra cy." /\ ",ericwl Political Sciel/cc Rf'vk n' 70
(June 19 76) : 456-468.
D"vid Stockman . '/'II(' Trilllllpil oJ Politics (New
Yo rk: Harper a n d Row. 1986 ).
Jam es Q. Wi lso n. I3l1rellllemey (New York: Ba sic
Books. 1989 ). eh . 6.
Hecla. " Iss u e etworks and th e Exec uli ve
Establishment." 87- 124.

23. Ri ch "rd r. Fenno. j r.. 'I'll e Pow('/" oj" ill(' Pllrse
(Boston: Lillie. Bro wn. 19(6).450. 597.
24. Jo hn E. Sch war tz and I.. Earl Shaw. '/'II(' Ulliled
Stafl'S COI1{1rl'SS ill COl1lparati ve' PerSpfCUV(' (Ilinsd ale. III.: Dryde n Press. 1976). 2b2- 263:
Nlltiol/lIl 10111"11111 (Ju ly 4. 19X I ): 12 1 1- 1214.

25. /""" inmlioll alld Nal llmli zatioll Service v. Cluui1111 . 462 U.S. 9 19 ( 1983): Mllille v. '/'IiiIJOIII.ot.
448 U.S. I ( 19S0 ).
26. Sec cases c ited in CorlVi n . 'I'lle COIIStitlltiOI/. 22 .

24.
25.

26.

27.

27. Steven Kelma n. "The Grace Commission: I-Iow
Much \I\'asle ill Govern m ent ?" PuiJlic i/lterest
(Winl er 1985) : 62- S7.
Kat~ cl a l. . /3l1reollcrm ic EIICD/Illters
(Ann Arbor: Survey Research Cent er. Uni ve rs il y of Michiga n. 1975). 63-69. 11 S- 12 0 .
I X4- I SS .
29. Frolll Hed 1ape 10 Hes llll s: Creati llg n COl'el"lllllelll
,[,/llfl Works Helter IIl1d COSIS Less. report of the

2H.

lX. Dani el

29.
30.

National Performance Rc viev,l, Vice Preside nt
A I Core. September 7. 199 3.

Chapter 16

The Judiciary

I . Hen ry J. Abraham. Til(' llUlil"ialProcess. ld cd.
( ew York: Oxford Universil y Press. 197,).
279- 280 .
2. Robe rt C. McCloskey. Til(' AIII('/"i("(lll SlIprellle
COllri (Chica go: Uni ve rsit y o f Chi ca go Press.
19(0 ).27.
3. ,"'arlmr!! 1'. Madisoll . 5 I1.S. 137 ( I XO l) : and
MCClIllod, V. Mllr!! lmlll. 17 u.s. 3 16 ( 18 19).
4. Marti n v. 11111111'1"5 Lessee. 14 I1.S. 304 ( 18 1(,):
and ('ollens " Vir!/i llia. 19 I1.S. ( 182 I ).
). Gihho/lS 1'. Orldm 22 U.S. ( I X24) .
6. Quotecl in Albe rt J. Beveridge. Tile LifeoJ l olill
Mors//(/II (Basio n : I io u ghl on Mifflin. 1919 ).
1'01.4.551.
7. Dred SCOil v. Sa lldford. 60 U.S. 393 ( I S57).
~. Abraham. ril e jlldicial Process. l8o.
9. III 1'1' Debs. 158 U.S. 564 (J S95).
10. Pollock v. /'(II"III('/"S' /'oall 6 '['I"lfst Co.. 157 U.S .
4 29 ( 1895).
II. UlIilnl Stntesv. Klli!/Ill. 15 6 U.S. 1 (1895).
12. Ci IlCiIlIlOti. N.o. & '1:1> RaillVay CO. I( IlIl ers"' l e
COllllllerce COlllllliss ioll . J 62 U.S. 1 S4 ( 1896).
13. Ilmllll",/" v. Dngellillfrl. 247 U.S. 251 (191 8).
14. /.oclillerv. NewYork.19 8U.S.45(190,»).
I 5. McCloskey. Ti,e IIl11ericolI SlIprellle CO llrl. 151.
In. MIIIIII v. Illillois. 94 U.S. I 13 ( 18 77).
17. Da!Jtoll-Coose Creek Hoi"vlI!1 Co. 1'. Ullil ed Sloles.
263 U.S. 456 ( 1924).
18. Alcllisoll. Topeka. olld SOIlW 1-1' /<aii rollli ('0. 1'.
NllIlI/lI'lI's. 1 74 U.S. % ( 1899 ).
19. MII!/ler v. Kllllsas. 123 U.S . 6 23 ( I XX 7).
20. Sl. LOllis COll solidll/ed COlli Co. v. IIlillois. I H5
U.S. 2 0 3 (1902).
2 1. NelV York ('elllmi Rlli lrood CO. v. Wllile. 243U.5.
I X8 ( 19 17).
22. Gerllloll /\/Iinll("e IlI slI/"(// /("e CO. " /.ell'is. 233 U.S.
3H9( 19 14).
23. Morto n Kell er. AJjilir., of SWle (Ca mbridge :
Ila rvard Uni ve rs ity Press. 1977). 3 69. Sec
also rvla ry Corn elia Porler. 'ThilL Co mmerce
Sh ali Be Free: A New Look at the Old LaissezFairc Cour t. " in Till' 5;lIprellu' COlirl Hev;('w. cd .

3 1.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

3X.

39.
40.
4 1.

42.
43 .

44.
45.

Ph ili p 13. Ku rl a n d (C h icago: University o f
Chicago Press. 1 976).] 3 5- 159.
CllieJ oJ Cap iw l Pol ice 1'. l eall ll ei/e HlIlIkill
I3ril/ode. 409 U.S. 972 ( 1972).
Aptlleker v. Secrewr!] oJ SllIl e. 378 U.S. 500
(1964).
'I'rap v. Olllles. 356 U.S. 86 ( 1958): A}"royilll v.
HlIsk. 387 U.S. 253 ( 196 7): a nd Sclilleider I(
HlIsk. 377 U.S. 163 ( I 964).
Lalllollt v. Postlllllster Gl'lIeml. 38 1 U.S. 30 I
(1% 5): and 13I01lllL \( Rizzi. 400 U.S. 4 10
(197 1).
Ric/llfrdsoll v. Ollvis. 4 09 U.S. 10 69 ( 1972):
U.S. 0<,/)(/1'1111('111 oJ /\rlril"ll/l.lIr(' v. MlIrry. 4 t 3
U.S. SOH ( 19 73) : lillwllez 1'. Weillll('rwr. 4 17
U.S. 62H ( I ,} 74): a n d Wll sllill!/IOII v. LeWIIII/.
394 U.S. 6 18 ( 1969).
Ulliled SillI es v. Lopez. 5 14 U.S. 549 (1995 ).
Sellli llole 'I'rihe oJ F/oridll 1'. Florida. 5 1 7 U.S. 44
( 1996): A ldell v. Maille. 527 U.S . 706 (1999):
Florida v. Col/e!!1' Sovillgs Halik. 527 U.S. 62 7
( 1999 ).
Dan ie l Ie Pinell o. "Linking Par ty to Judicial Ideology in A merica n Court s: A Mclaa nalys is." Illsticf S!!slelll JOIll"llol 2 0 (1999):
2 19 - 254.
A n o pin io n sur vey of federa l jud ges s h ows
how pa r ty affects ideo logy: sec Althea K.
Naga i. Stan ley Rot h m a n. a nd S. Robert
Lichler. "The Verdict of Federal Jud ges." PlIblic
Opillioll ( ove mberlDccember 1987): 52- 56.
Ullited Slates 1'. LaIlZf/. 2(,0 U.S. 377 ( 1922). cr.
Abbllte v. Ullited Swtes. 359 U.S. 187 ( 1,} 5,}).
a nd /3o rl klls 1'. II/ill ois. 359 U.S. 12 1 ( 19S9).
Gideoll v. Woilllvri(lllI. 372 U.S. 335 ( 1963).
The story is told in Anth ony Lewis. Cideoll's
rnOIlI}('1 (New York: Random Ii o use. 19 (4).
Erwin Cri swo ld. "Rationing Ju sti ce: Th e
Supre me Court's Case Load a nd What th e
Court Docs Not Do." Corlldl Lmv Review 60
( 1,}75): 335- l54.
Jose ph We is. Jr.. ""Disconn ec tin g lhe Ove rloaded Circuits- A 1'1'"1 lor" Unil1ed Co urt of
Appea ls." SI. l.ol/is Ulli versit!! /'(111' 10llnIai 39
( I Y95): 455.
III!}eskll Pipelille Servin' Co. v. Wi ldem ess Sociel!!. 42 1 U.S. 240 ( I Y75).
Filisl 1'. ColiI'll . 392 U.S. 83 (1968). wh ic h
modilk d the earl ier FrolflillyllUlI/ v. Mel/Oil.
262 U.S. 447 (192 3): Ulli ted SWles v. Rieliard5011 . 4 1S U.S. J 66 (1947).
BrolVlIl'. Honnlof Edumtioll of Topekn. 34 7 U.S .
483 ( 1954).
Hilker v. Cllrr. 369 U.S. 186 ( 1962 ).
See Lo uise We in berg. '"1\ New Ju d icia l Federal is m ?" /)lIedlllll s (Winter 19 7H): 12 9- 14 1 .
Qu oted in Abraham. 'I'lie jlldiciolProcess. 3 30.
Ca ro ly n D. Ric hm o nd. "The I~ehnquist Co url:
W h at Is in Siore fo r Consti luliona l Preceden t'" N('IV York /'(11 1' Review 39 ( 199 4): 51 I .
Colearow v. Greell. 328 U.S. ,49 ( 1946).
The Co urt abandoned th e " po lil ica l qu esLi on" doc trin e in /3akl!( v. Curr, 369 U.S. I X6
( 1962). a nd began to change con gressio na ldistri c t apportionment in vVeslJe,.,.u v..Sull(lrrs.
376 U.S. I ( 1964).

NIl

Notes
46. Donald L. Ilorowit2. 7'he CO llrls al/{I Socia l PoliC!! (Was hin gto n. D. C.: Broo kin gs Instituti o n.
1977).6.
47. Gates v. Co llier. 349 F. S upp. 88 1 ( 1972).
48. LOll v. NicilO ls. 414 U.S. 563 ( 1974) .
49. Jan e Burnbaulll. "Guilty! Too Many Lawyers
and Too Mu c h Liti gation'" Hll silless Week
(Ap ril 13. 1992).60- 61.
50 . Joc l B. Grossman and Austin Sa rat. "Liti ga-

tion in th e Federa l Co u r ts: A Co mparati ve
Per specti ve'" Law

alld Sociel.', Heview 9 (Win -

ter 19 75): 32 1- 346.
5 1. Adm inis trative Office o f th e U.S. Courts .

AlIlIllal Report. 1988. 109.
52. jack W. Pe ltaso n. Fifl!!-eiflht. LOllel!! Mell:
SO li them Federal jlldfles ami School Dese{jl"egatiOIl (Ne w Yo rk: Harcourt Brace. 19(1 ).
53. A nthon y Palrid ge and William B. Eldrid ge.
7'he Secolld Circ llil Sent('llcillg St lld!! (Was hin gton. D.C.: Federa l judi c ia l Ce nter. 1974).
54. AlJillgtOIl School Dislricl v. Schelllpp. 374 U.S.
203 (1963).
55. Robe rt II. Birkby. '"T h e Supreme Co urt and
the Bible Be lt.·· MidlVesl jOllmal o( Political
Sciell ce 10 ( 1966): 3.
56. Cass R. Sun s te in. " Impeac hi ng th e Pres ident." University of Pennsylvania Law Revie\V
14 7 (199 8): 279.
57 . Ullited SlaleS v. Blltler. 297 .S. 1 (J 936).
58 . Ex parte McCardle. 74 U.S. 506 (1869) .
59 . Walte r F. Murphy. CO II!/fess alld the CO llrt
(C hi cago: Unive rs ity of Chi cago Press.
19(2) : and C. Il er man Pritc h e tt. CO lluress
Versus Oil' Supreml' CO /l rt (Minneapo lis: Uni ve rs ity o f Minncso ta Press. 19( 1).
60. Grego ry A. Ca lde ira. "Neither the Pu rse nor
th e Sword: Dy nami cs of Public Co nfid e n ce in
th e U.S. Supre m e Co urt.·· AlIleriCIIII Political

7.

Praeger. 1975).2 08- 2 15.
8. fiederali.~t No. 62.
9. Wa lker. "Scttin g th e Agenda." 434. 439 . 44 1.
I II. This is a revi sed ve rsion o f a th eo ry o ri g ina lly
prese nt.ed in james Q. Wilso n. Political OrrlallizatiOIlS (New York: Basic Books. 1973). c h . 10.
There arc ot.her ways of classifying public policics. notab ly that of Theodore j. Lowi. ')\merican Business. Publ ic Pol icy. Ca se Stud ies . and
Politica l Th eo ry." World Politics 16 (ju ly 19(4).

lIallce

The Policy-Making Process

J 3.
14.

1 5.

16.

18. Ala n L. Sel tze r. "Woodrow Wilson as 'Corpo-

19.

20.

19(0).68.

jOllmal of Political Science 7 ( 19 77): 343.44 1.
3. Statistical Abstracl of tile United States. 19 75
(Wa s h in g to n. D.C.: Governme n t Printing
Omce. 19 75). 342-343. 349 .
4. A lex is de Tocqu ev ille. Tile Old ilegillle al/{I tile
i-'retlL'/i Revo/IlLiol/. tran s. Gitbert Stuart (Ga rde n Ci ty. N. Y.: Doub leda y Anc h or Books.
1955). 176- 177. (First publis h ed in 1856.)
5. David O. Sears an d j. 13. McConahay. Ti,e Polilics

of Violence (Boston: Houg hto n Mimin . 1973).
Co mpare Abraham II. Mille r e t al.. "The New
Ur ban Blacks." /Wlllieil.!1 3 ( 1976): 338- 30 7.
6. Dcllliel Patri ck Moy nih an. J\!faxi'"l1111 Feasible
Misllllderstalldill{f (Ne w York: Free Press.
19(9). c h. 2.

rate Capilalislllallli tile Bios of GovemlllellI PoliC!! (New York: W iley. 1974).
Charl es E. Lindblom. Politics IIIld Markets (New
York: Basic Books. 1977).
joseph Schumpeter. Capitalislll. Socialislll. alld
Delllocrac!! (New York: I-Iarper and Row.
19511).
Louis Ga lambos. Tile PII/JIic illla{fe of Big BllsilIess ill Alllerica. 18S0- 1940 (Baltimore: jo hns
Hopkins Un iversity Press. 19 75) .
Suza nne Weaver. Decision to ProseclIte: Ora(llliZI//.iOIl IIlId Plllilie Policy ill I.lle Alltitrllst Divisioll
(Ca mbrid ge. Mass.: M IT Press. 197 7): Ro bert
II . Bork. TIte /llItitrllst Paradox ( ew Yo rk:
Basic Books. 19 ?X) .

17. Ri chard /\. Posner. Allt.itrllsl. Lo w: All Ecol/ol1lic
Perspective (C hi ca go: Un ivers ity of Chi cago
Press. J 9 76).25 .

I. E. E. Schattschneider. Tile Selllisovereigll People
(Ne w York : Ho lt. Rin e h a rt and Win s ton.
2. jac k L. Walke r. "Setti n g th e Agenda in the U.S.
Senate: A Theo ry of Problem Selectio n ." Britisll

OI/{l

lI a jn a. "S upe rfund: Costly Program Und er
Fire." CO llrier-Post (Fe bruary 13. 1994): 6A.
12. Edward S. Greenbe rg. Servill{f tile Few: Corpo-

Politics 43 (198 1): 24-39.

Chapter 17

r.

KettI. SII!IrilllJ Power: Pllblic GoverPrivate Markels (Was hin gto n . D. C.:
Brook in gs In s titution. 1993): Lawre n ce j.

I I . Dona ld

Sciell ce ilevielV SO (1986): 1209- 1226 . Sce
a lso joseph 'I'. Tan n e n hau s and Walter F.
Murp hy. "Pattern s o f P ubl ic Su ppo rt for t h e
S upre m e Co urt: A Panel Study." jOllmal of

e lson W. Po lsby. "Goodbye to th e Sen ate's
Inner Cl ub." in Congress ill Clul1I{jl': Evo /uLio"
alld Hejimll. cd. Norman j. Ornstein (New York:

21.

rate-L iberal': Toward a Reco ns ide rati o n of Left
Rev ision ist Historiography." Westem Political
Qllarterl!! 311 (June 19 77) : 183-2 12.
Weaver. Decisioll to Prosecllle: and Ro be rt A.
Katz nl ann. Regll/aLory Bllreaucracy: Til e Federa l
Trade COII/II/issioll {md AntiLrll st Policy (Cambridge. Ma ss.: MIT Press. 19 80 ).
Charl es R. Plott. "Occupational Self-Regu lat io n: A Case Study of the Oklahoma Dry
Cleaners." Journal oj Law and Econoll/ics 8
(October 1965): 195-222 .
Pa ul H. MacAvoy. ed .. Fecleral Milk Marketing
Orders alld Price SlIpports (Was hington. D.C.:
American Enterprise In stitute. 1977).
Ibid .. 111 .

22.
23. COllwessiOllll1 Qllarterl!} Weeki!! Report (A pril
21. 1990): 11 84- 11 88.
24. Pietro Nivo la . "'rhe ew Pork Barre l." I3rookillllS li evielV (Wi nte r 199 8): h- 13.
25. Upton Sin cla ir. Til e Jllllllie (Ne w York: Doubleday. Pa ge and Co .. 190h).
26. Mark V. Nade l. Tile Politics of COIlSlllller ProtectiOIl (Indianapo lis . Ind.: Bobbs-Merrill. 197 1).
143- 144.
27. Alfred A. M<lrcus. PrO/llisl' alld Peljimllllllce:
CllOosill[J (llId IlIIp/ell/ enti"!1(III Ellvi rolltllf!Ilwl PoliC!} (Westport. Co nn.: Greenwood Press. 1980).
28. N<lde l. Politics. hh- 80.

29. Martha Derthi c k and Pau l j. Qui rk. Tile Politics
of Dereglliatioll (Was hin g to n. D.C.: Brookings
In stitution. 1985).
30. Exec utive Ord ers I 182 1 ( 1974).12044
( 1978). and 12291 (19 8 1).

Chapter 18

Economic Policy

I . NelV York Tillles (july 4 . 1999): 5: Natiollal
jOllmll1 (january 30. 1999) : 25 '1.
2. Edward R. Tufte. PoliticlIl COlltrol of tile licolloIII!! (Prin ceton. N.j.: Princeton Univers ity
Press. 1978): 84; Dou gla s A. Hib bs. jr.. "The
Mass Pub li c a nd Ma croeco nomi c Per form a n ce : T h e Dy nami cs o f Public Opinion
Toward Une mploy m e nt a nd inilation." /llIIeri-

call JOllmal of PoliticlIl Sciell ce 23 ( 1979 ):
705-73 1.
3. D. Rod eri ck Kiewiet. Alacroeconol1lics ami

Micropolitics: Tile Electoral Effect of Ecollolll ic
issues (Chi cago : Uni vers ity of Chicago Press.
19 83); Morr is P. Fiorina. "Eco n omic Retrospective Votin g in Am erican Na tiona l Elections: 1\ Micro-Analysis," Alllericall journal of
Political Sciellce 22 ( 19 78): 426--44 3: Do n a ld
R. Kinder a nd D. Rod e ri ck Kiew ie!. "Sociotropic Politics : T h e Am eri ca n Case." British JOllrnal

of Political Sciellce 11 (198 1): 129- 161.
4 . NelV York Tillles /CBS News poll c ited in Douglas 1\. Hibbs . jr.. "President Reaga n 's Mandate from th e 1980 Elec tion s: A Shi ft to the
Ri ght?" /llIIericlIlI Politics Qllllrterly 10 ( 1982):

387-420.
5. I libbs. "The Mass Public,"
6. Ibid .
7. Kiewi et. Macroecollolllics II l1d MicropoliUcs.
8. Mic h ael S. Lew is-Bec k. "Comparative Economi c Voling: Britain. Fran ce. Germany.
Ita ly.. ' Alllericall JOllm1l1 of PolitiCllI Sciell ce

30 (1986): 31 5- 34 6.
9. Douglas A. lI ibbs. j r.. "Politica l Parties a nd
Macroeco n o mi c Pol icy. " /llIIericall Political Science RevielV 7 1 (19 77): 1467-J487.
10. Ki e wiet. Mllcroecollolllics IIl1d Micropolitics. 69.
1 J . Pollock" l'(lI"lIIers' Loall & 'I'mst Co. , I 57 U.S.
429 .158 U.S. 601 (1895) .
12. BC ews/ Wall Street /ollmlll poll . as reported
in Natiollal jOllrnal (july 12 . 1986): 1741.

Chapter 19

Social Welfare

1. For a genera l di scu ssion see Charles E. Gil be rt.
"Welfare Po licy." in Halldbook of Political Sciellce. ed. Fred L Gree n ste in a nd Ne lso n W.
Po ls by (Reading. Ma ss.: Add ison-Wes ley.
19 75). vo l. 6. c h . 4.
2. COllgress ami the Na tioll. 1')45- 1964 (Washington. D. C. : Congression a l Qua r terly Ser vice.

1965). 1225.
3. Ha ro ld E. Rayn es . Social Securit!! ill Brit.llill: A
lIistor!! (Londo n: Pitman . J 960). c h . 18. Sec
a lso Il u g h I lecio . Moderll Socilll Politics ill
Britaill alld SlVedell (New f laven. Co nn .: Ya le
Uni ve rsi ty Prcss. 1974).
4. Amy E. Black. Do u glas Koopman. and David
K. Ryde r. Of Little Fllith: Th e Politics of Glmlle

v

NI2

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

10.

I I.

Notes

W Busll's Faitll-Based Illitiatives (Washin gton.
D.C. : Geo rgetown Unive rsity Press. 2004).
Anne Farris. Richa rd P. Nathan. a nd David
Wright. Tile EXpmlllill!J Adlll illistrative Presidfllc!J: George W. BLIsh ami th e Faith-Based illitiative
(Alba ny : New Yo rk : e lson A. Rockefelle r
Institute of Government. 2004). Executive
Summary. 2.
Stephen V. Mons ma . Puttillg I·"itll ill Partllersllips: Welfare-to-Work ill Four Ciries (A nn
Arbor. Mich .: University of Mic hi ga n Press.
2004). ix. 70.
Ibid .. x.
Surveys by Pew Forum on Religion a nd Public
Life: Al1I erica n Views Oil Religio/l, Politics, lllld
Public Policy (Wash in gto n . D.C.: Pew Forum .
2001): Lift Every Voice: A Report all Religioll ill
AlIlericall Public Life (Washin gton. D.C.: Pew
Forum. 2002) : AlIlericalls Struggle IVitll Heligioll's Role at HOllie a/lll Abroad (Washington.
D.C. : Pew Forum. 2002 ).
Histories of the 1935 act include Edwin E.
Witte. Tile DeveloplIlellt of II,e Social Security
Act (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
1962). A different view. olTering a neo-Marx ist
interpreta tion of the act. ca n be fo und in
Frances Fox Piven and Richard A. Cloward. Regulatillg tile Poor ( ewYork: Pan theon. 1971).
The development of Medicare is described in
Theodo re Marmor. "Docto rs. Politics. a nd
Hea lth Ins ura nce for the Aged: The Enactment of Medica re." in Cases ill Contel1lpomru
AlIlericllll Covert/lIlellt. ed. Allan Sindler
(Boston: Little. Brown. 1969).
Charles R. Morris. '1'00 Milch of a Cood Thillg?

Why Healtll Care Spelldillg WOII't M"ke Us Sick

12 .

13.

14.

15.
16.

J 7.

I S.

(New York: The Century Foundation. 2000).
57.
Ri ck Blizzard. "Why Are I-Iea lthcare Issues
Grid locked?" Ga llu p Tuesday Briefing. june
25.2002.
Michae l Ha rrington. Tlte Otller AlIlerica (Ba ltim ore: Pe nguin Books. 19 62).
Michael E. Schiltz. Public Attitudes Toward
Soci,,1 Security. 1935-1965. Research Report
No.3. Socia l Security Administration. US.
Department of Hea lth. Education. and Welfare (Washington. D.C.: Government Printin g
Orn ce. 1970). 36.98.128.140.
Ibid .. ch. 4. 154-J 65
Charles Murray. Losillg Groulld: Alllerica/l Social
Policy. 1950-1980 (New York: Basic Books.
1984). A critique of Murray is Willia m j. Wilson. The Trllly DisadVlllltaged (C hicago: Uni versity of Chicago Press. ] 987) . esp. chs. 3 a nd 4.
Ri chard J> Na th an and Thomas L. Ga is. "The
Devolution Revolution ." Bllleprillt Uanuaryl
February 2002): 32.
Susan Q. Stranahan. "The Big Fix." AA HP BII/lerill 45. no. J 1 (Deccmber 2004) : 14.

Chapter 20

Foreign and Military Policy

I . Alex is de Tocqueville. Delllocracy ill Allleric'a.
vo l. J. cd . Phillips Bradley ( ew York: Knopf.
J 951). 235.

2. See Victor Davis Ha nson . Cal'llage alld ClIltllre
(Ne w York: An chor Books. 2002) a nd Il a nson.
Tlte Soul of Battle (New Yo rk : Free Press. 1999 ).
3. Ri cha rd La u . Th ad A. Brown. a nd David O.
Scars. "SeW-In terest and Civili ans' Atliludes
'rowa rd the Vielnam War." Public Opi"ion
QI/{l/'terly 42 ( 1'J 7S) : 4b4-4S I .
4 . Edward S. Corwin. T"e Presidellt: OJflce alld
Powers (New York: New York University Press.
1940).200.
5. Louis W. Koeni g. Th e Chief "xecllti ve. 3d cd.
(Ne w York: lI arcourt Brace jova nov ic h .
19 75) . 2 1 7.
6. Louis Fisher. Presidellt alld COll yress (Ne w York:
Free Press. 19 72) . 45: Ulliwd Sl.ates v. He/'IIOIIL.
30 1 U.S. 324 ( 1937) .
7. Aaron Wildavsky. "The Two Presidencies." in
The Presidellcy. cd. Wi ldavsky (Boston: Lillie.
Brown. J969 ). 23 1.
8 . Loch johnson a nd ja mes M. McCormick. "The
Ma king of In ternational Agreements: A Reap-

Allleriel/ll Political Sciellce Review 64 (June
1970): 536- 547.
21. Erikson and Lultbeg. Alllericall Public Opillioll.
52.
22. john E. Mueller. WlII: Presidents. and Public
Opillioll (New York: Wi ley. 19 73). I 10.
23. Ibid .. I J 2 .
24. Milto n j. Rosen berg. Sidney Verba. and Phili p
E. Converse. Vietnalll amI lite Silellt Majority
( ew York: Ha rper and Row. 19 70 ).26- 27.
25. Erikson a nd Luttbeg. AUlericl/1I Public Opillioll.
155.
2b. john R. Onea l and Brad Lian . "Presidents. the
Use of Military Force. and Public Opinion. "
Wo rkin g Papers in In ternational Security

2 7.

2 8.

prai sa l of CongreSSional Involvement. " Jour-

Iwl of Politics. 40 (J 978).468-478.
9. Bern a rd E. Brown. "The Decision to End the
Algerian War," in Cases ill COlllparative Politics.
ed. ja mes B. Christoph (Bosto n : Lillie. Brown.
196 5) . ] 54-1 80 : Roy C. Macridis. "De Ga ulle
and NATO." in ModenI European Gover1lments.
ed. Macridis (E nglewood Clifls . N.j. : PrenticeHall. 1965). 92- I] 5: and john E. Sc hwartz
and L. Ea rl Sh aw. 'I'lte Ullited States COIIWess ill
COlllpamtive Perspective (li in sda le. III. : Dryden
Press. 1976).2 35- 236.
10. Peter G. Richards. Parlialllellt amI Ford!!11 Affairs
(Lo ndon: Geo rge Allen a nd Unwin . 19(7).
37- 38: Schwar tz a nd Shaw. The Ull ited Slates

29.

30.

31.

Sentiment in America." Al1lerica ll JOUr/wi

Rusk. and Arthur C. Wolfe. "Continuity and
Change in Ameri can Politics." Allleric(l/l Polili -

33.
34.

wisdom." His view of N ixo n's actions was

a good dea l less charitab le in Tlte illlperial
Presidellcy (Boston: Houghton Mimin . 1974).
ch .7.

35.

12. Ullited States" Curtiss-Wrigltt Export Co .. 299

36.

13.
14.

15.
I h.

17.

US. 304 (1936).
Mitcllellv. Lllird. 488 F.2d 6 11 (19 73).
Pri ze Cases. 67 U.S. 635 (1863 ): Mora v.
McNalllara. 389 U.S. 934 (1964): Massac/ II'sells v. Laird. 400 U.S. 886 (1970).
DI/Illes I/lld Moore v. Re!l'lII. 4 35 U.S. 654
(198 1 ).
KOrrtlllllSII v. Ullited States. 323 U.S. 2 14
(J 944).
Yo/lII!lstOUlII Slteet & '/id)e Co. " SI/ wyer. 343
U.S. 579 (19 52).

18. lI11l11i[JraU oII (I11d NaUira li zaUolI St!rvice v.

C/llldllll. 10 3 S. Cl. 2764 ( 1983).
19. Ro bert S. Erikson a nd Norman I{. Luttbeg.
AlIIericlII I Pllblit Opillioll (New York: Wi ley.
1973) . 50- 5 1.
20. Wi lliam Ie Caspary. "The 'Mood Theory': A
Study of Publi c Opinion and Foreign Policy."

of

SOCiolo!ly 78 ( 1973): 5 I 3- 5 36.
32 . Philip E. Converse. Wa rren E. Miller. jerrold G.

COllyress ill COl1lparative Perspective. 235.

II. Arthur M. Schlesin ger. jr.. A T/ lOusalld Days:
JOltll I·: Ken lledy ill the White HOllse (Boston :
Ho u g hto n Mifflin. J 9(5). c h s. 30. 3 I .
Sch lesinger. at p. 84 I. described Kennedy's
a ctions as a "bri lli a ntly contro lled. " "matc hlessly ca librated" combin atio n of "nerve and

1- 92- 8. Hoover Instit ut ion . Stanford. Ca lil·.
Uu ly 1992).
Benjamin C. Schwart. Casualities. Public OpilliOIl. afl(l US. Militar!J Ill tervelltiou (Sa nta Monica . Calif.: RA D. 1994).
Mueller. WlII: Presidellts. alld Public Opillioll.
45-47. 1 69.
james Q. Wilson and Ka rly n Bowman. "Delln ing the Peace Pa rty. " Tlte Public Illterest (Fall
2003): 69- 78.
Everett Carll Ladd. "Si nce World War II. America ns Have Persiste ntly Looked Outwa rd. " Tlte
Public Perspective (Au gust/September 199 7):
5- 34.
Howard Schu man . "Two Sources or Antiwar

37.
38 .
39.

a d Sciellce Review 63 (Decembe r ] 969):
1083- 11 05: john P Robinson. "P ublic Reacti on to Po li ti ca l Protest : Chicago. J 96S."
Public Opillioll QIII/rterly 34 (Sp rin g 19 70):
1- 9.
james D. Wright. "Life. Time. and the Fortunes
of War." TrillISactioll 9 (January J 9 72) .
john E. Rielly. Alllericall Public Opilliollalld U.S.
Foreigll Policy. 1999 (Chicago: Chicago Council 0 11 Foreign Relations. 1999).
X. "The Sources or Sov iet Conduct. " Foreigll
AJJairs 25 Uuly 194 7): 566.
Walter Lippmann. Tlte Cold WI/r (New York:
Harper Brothers. 1947).
Erikson and Luttbeg. Alllericall Public Opillioll.
52.
Mueller. Will: Presidellts. ali(I Public Opillioll.
40 .
Michael Roskin. "From Pearl lI arbor to Vietnam: Shi ftin g Gencra ti onal Paradi gms and

Foreign Policy." Politicl/l Sciellce Quarlnly 89
(Fa ll 19 74): 567.
40. Frank L. Klingberg. "The Histor ical Alterna tion of Moods in America n Foreign Po licy."
Wo rld Politics 4 (1952): 239- 273.
41. Roskin . "From Pea rill arbo r. " 567.
42. Af1I ('ric(l1l Public Opillioll ami U.S. Foreigll Policy.
1987 {Chicago: Chicago Coun cil on Forci gn

Re la tions. 1987).33.
43. Sta nley Liebe rson . 'I\n Em pirica l Study o r
Military- Indu strial Linkages." ill Testillg tile

Notes
Theory of the Mililllry lmlustrial COlllplex. cd.
Steven Rosen (Lexi ngton. Mass.: D.C. Ile"th l
Lex in gton Books. 1973). 74.
44. Arnold K"nter. "Congress "nd the Defe nse
Budget: 1960- 19 70." Alllericall Political Scielll'e Heview66 ( 1972): 129- 143.
45. Robert j. Arlo "Why We Ove rspend "nd Unde raccomplish: Weapon s Procurement and th e

Mi lil"ry-lndu Slri"' Complex." in Rosen . 'I'estillg th e 'I'heory. 249.
46 . Quoted in Raben j. Arl. 'I'h e TFX Decisioll:
MeNalllara alld Ihe Nlililllry (Boston: Lillie.
Brow n. 19 (8). 126.
47. Bill Ke ller. "Competition: A Penlilgon B"ttlefi eld ." New York Tillles (May J 2. 1983). section

3. p. J.
48. james Fairha ll. "The Case for the $435 H"mmer." WashillgtOll MOllthly Uanua ry 19 87): 50.
49. 'J'I, e Natiollal Security Strategy of Ihe Ullited
States of Alllerica. September 200 2. cover letter a nd p. 6.
50. The vote on the Persian Gulf Wile as reported in
COllgress Illld the Natioll. vol. 8 (Washington.
D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Press. 1993) .
3 10: the vote on the war in Iraq " s reported in
the New York Tilll es (October 12. 2002): A 11.
5 I . Th ere were no congressiollCJI votes on our military efforts in Bosnia and Kosovo . but speech-

es supportin g the m were made by (a mong
others) Democratic Senators B"rb"ra Boxer.
Ca rl Lcvin. and Pa ul Wellstone and Representati ve David Bonior: speeches opposing them
were made by (a mong others) Hepublican
Senators I)o n Nickles and Jo hn Warn er and by
Hcprcsc ntali vcs Roberll3arr and lJan Burton.
Jn

the voLe on the i Il vasio n or Iraq . each grou p
took the opposite position.
32. jam es Dobbins et "' .. Alllerica's Hole ill Na tioll
BIlildillY (S" nt" Monic". C" lif. : RAND. 2(0 3).

Chapter 21

Environmental Policy

1. A lexa nder W. Asti n e l aI. , Tile Americall Freslz-

Natiollal Norllls for 1989 (Los Angeles:
UCLA Graduate School of Education. 1989).
8 9.
2 . john VII. Bridgcland. speakin g at th e Robert A.
Fox Leadership Forum. Uni versity or Pennsylvania. September 30. 2 004.
1ll(1ll:

3. Sa ll ie Baliunas. "The Koyo to Protocol and
Global Warming." Illlprilll is 3 1 (March 2002):
Clilllate Cilallge: All t\llalysis of SOllle Key QuestiDIlS (Washin gton. D.C.: Na tion" 1 Academy of
Sciences. 2000): Bjorn Lomborg. Tile Skeptical
Environlllentalist (Ca mbridge: Ca mbridge University Press . 2001 ). ch . 24.
4 . Barry G. Rabe. "Statehouse and Green house:
The States Are T"kin g the Le"d on Climate
Change." Brookings Hevie", 20 (Spring 2002):
11 -13.
5. 13aliunas. "Koyoto Protoco l." 2.
6. David Vogel. National Styles of Regu/atioll
(Ithaca. N.Y.: Cornell University Press. 1986).
19- 30.
7. For "rgumen!s by activists. see Albert Gore.
Eartll ill tile Balallee (Boston: Houghton Mirnino 1992). and Stephen Schneider. Global
Warlllill!! (San Francisco: Sierra Club Books.
1989). For arguments by skeptics. see Gregg
Easterbrook. A MOlllent on the Earlll (New
York: Vikin g. 1995). c h. 17: Frederick Seitz
et al .. "Environme ntal Effects or Increased
Atmosph e ric Carbo n Di ox ide." on the
World Wid e Web al www.oislll.org/projcct:
and Patrick j. Mi chaels. "Globa l Deceplion."
Policy Study 146. Center for th c Study of
American l3usincss. Wa shin gton Universi ty

(1998).
8 . Ea sterbrook. 1I MOlllell!. 309.

N13

9 . R. Shep Melnick. Reglliationalld the COllrts: The
Case of th e C/eall Air Act (Was hin gton. D. C.:
Brookin gs In stitution. ] 983). c h. 9.
10. Pietro S. Nivola . The Politics of Ellerg!} COllservation (W"shi ngton. D.C.: Brookings Institulio n. J 986). 11 - 12. 244- 247.
1 J . Robert VII. Crandall. "Pollution. Environmentalists. and the Coa l Lobby." in TI, e Politiml
Econollly of Deregulation. cd. Roger G. Noll
and Bru ce M. Own (Washi ngton. D. C.: America n Enterprise Institute. 19 83). 84- 96:
Crand"11. COlltrol/illg Illdll strial POl/lltiOIl
(Washingto n. D. C.: Brookings In stituti on.
1983).
12. Bruce A. Ackerman "nd Wi lliam T. H"ssler.
Clear Coal/ Dirty Air (New H"ven. Conn. : Ya le
University Press. 1981 ).
13. Robert Dorfman. "Lessons of Pesticide Regu lalion." in He/o'-III of Envirol1l ll elltalHeguJatioll.

14.
13 .

16.

J 7.

cd. Wes ley A. Magat (Cambridge. Mass .:
Ballinger. 1982). 13- 30.
Easterbrook. A MOlllellt. 386-3 93.
COllgressiollal Quarterly Weekly Report (Ja nu ary
12. 1990): ] 66-170.
Richard Doll a nd Richard I'eto. "The Causes of
Ca ncer. " jOllrnal of the National Ca ueer In stilllte
66 (198 1): World Cancer Rese"rc h Fund .
Food. Nlltrition, and tile Preve"tion of Cancer
(Washin gton . D.C.: American In st ilu te for
C" ncer Resea rch. 1997).
R. Shep Melnick. "Deadlines. Cyn icism. and
Common Sense." Th e /3rookill!}S Heview (Fall
1983 ): 2 1- 24.

Chapter 22

Who Governs? To What Ends?

I. Alex is de 'I'ocqu evi lle. Dellloeracy ill !\lIleriCtl.
vol. 2. cd. Phillips Bradley (New York : Knopf.
19 51) . book 2. ch. I.

* INDEX
AARP (A merica n Association of Retired Per-

sons). 270- 27 1. 287.522
ABC net.work. 296. 299 . 3 10
Abortio n. 28(l'n.). 86. 172. 227. 253. 28 1
activists and. 472
jud ic iary on. 59. 143-144. 448. 464
la ndma rk cases. 143

NA HAL. 274. 275
pub lic fun ding of. 71
views of Congress on. 33 1. 338-339
Ac heson. Dea n. 533
Acheson's Ru lc. 426
Acid rain. 564. 566-567
ACLU (A merica n Civil Liberties Union ). 99.
109.25 1.272.451
Ac ti vis m . 8 1. 238
abortio n a nd. 472
consumer. 4 19. 42 7
env iro nmenta l. 563
government. 61-(,2. 582. 584. 588
here-and-now argument and. 487
interest groups and. 269. 280
j udicia l.

See Ju dicial activism

partisan. 225. 390
politica l. 162 . 1 7 1. 188.215- 2 16.255
st udenl. See Student acti vism
uni on. 2 16
'J\c tivist" agencies. 422
ADA (America ns wi th Disabil ities Act) of 1990.
6(,- 67. 147
Ada ms. Jo hn. 5. 18. 20. 201
Cong ress and. 322

Constitution a nd. 24 . 85
Marb"ry v. Mallison and. 440. 441
presidency or. 374. 384. 388
vice presidency or. 401. 41 2
Adams. john Qu incy. 240. 388
Adams. Samuel. 24. 30
Allal'llnll case ( 1995) . 148 . .149
Ad hoc staff stru cture. 38 J. 382
Adm inistration Com mittee (I louse). 345
Administrative Procedure Act (1946).424. 586
Adversa ria l politics. 561
Adversa ri a l press. 292 . 309 . 3 10. 3 11
Adve rsary c ulture. 411 . 459
Adver tisi ng
ca mpai gn. 234. 240 . 242 . 244. 257
freedom of ex pression in. 109
negative ca mpaign ads. 234. 257.26 1. 310
television. 240. 302- 303
Advocacy organiza tions. 304

AFBF (A meri ca n Farm Bureau Federation).
26('.2(,7
AFDC (Aid to Fa milies with De pe ndent Children ). 68. 69.474.5 1 3.5 1 5.522- 523.
524
MOnnativeaction. 144- 149. 1 69. 399.448.
47 1
equa lity of opportu ni ty and. 145- 149
SupremeCourton.146- 147. 148. 149
Afgh anistan
Soviet invasio n of. 548
U.S. invasio n of. 88. 120. 399.494.533.
539.545.557
AFL-C IO. I 1. 109. 2 17.266.276.280.455

A frica n A mericans
in burea ucra cy. 421

in cab inet. 3S 7
civil rights of. 125. 126- 127.138. 33 J
in Congress. 325- 326. 325(tab. ). 340-34 J
Democratic party and. 222. 258. 259
discrimination against. 3-4. 95(l1g.)
as elected officials. 140(l1g.)
in judi cia ry. 447(l1g.)
NAAC P a nd. 269
opin ions of. 164- 1 65. 1 64(tab.). 224
po li tical a lli ances of. 22 1
politica l participation or. 188. 191. 193(ng.)
ra c ia l eq ua lity and . 78
1960s riots a nd. 471-472
on Supreme Court. 442. 443.46]
tru st in instit ution s by. 88- 89
voti ng rights of. 138. 180- 18 .1 . L82
welfare and . 5 I 3
Age. See !liso Yout h
generation gaps on issues. I 59(l1g. )
politica l participa tion and. I S3. 188.
I 89 (Og.). 46 1
Age Discrim inalion Act. 3 5~

Agency for Interna tiona l Development. 424 .
537.557
Agnew. Spiro. 402-403
Agricu ltura l Adjustment Act. 482
Agricu ltura l pesticides. 560- 561. 563.
568- 569.572
Agricultural subsidies. 47H. 482-483.584
Agr iculture. N utr ition. a nd Forestry Commiltee

(Sena te) . 344
Agric ulture Committee (I louse). 345 . 568
Agric ulture Committee (Senate) . 568
Agriculture Department. 413. 426 . 427 . 482.
537
AIDS. discussion or. 174
Aid to Fami lies with Dependent Children
(AFDC). 68 . 69 . 474 . 513. 5 15.
522- 523.524
Ai rline industry. 280
regu lation of. 477. 488. 489
Air quality standards. 565. 571
See !liso Clean Air Act: Env ironmen tal policy
Ala ba ma. 135. J 37. I 83(tab.). 2J 7. 457
Alba nia ns. in Kosovo. 544- 545 . 549
Alba ny. Georgia. 106
Al bany. New York. 2 14
Alilell v. Mai lle (J 999 ).58
Alger. Il orat io. 1>6
Algeri a. 534
Aliens. rights of. 146 . .1 81
foreign detai nees. 120- 121
All -volunteer force (AVF). 550
Almond. Gabriel. 80. 269
AI Qaeda. 120. 539. See !I/so Bin Laden. Osama
AMA. See American Medical Associa tion
(AMA)
All/Mac" v. Nonvick (1979).146
Ame ndme nts to bi lls. 352. 354. 356
Ame ndme nts to Constit ution. See Constillltiona I Amendments
America Comi ng Togethe r. 252
America for job Security. 252

American Associa ti on of Retired Persons

(AAR P). 270-27 J. 287.522
Ameri can Civi l Liberties Union (ACLU). 99.
109.25 ] .272.45 1
American Colton Ma nufacturers Insti tute.
2(,8- 269
Ameri ca n Cou ncil on Edu cation. 269. 276

America n Enterprise [nstitulc. 273
America n Farm Bureau Federali on (AFI3F),

266.267
Ameri ca n Federa tion of Labor (A FL). 578
See !I/so AFL-CIO
Ame ri can Independent party. 22 0-22 1
Ame ri ca n Indian Movement. 285
American ism. 78- 79
Ame rica n Jew ish Coml1liUce. 267

America n Legion. 270.426

Ame rica n Med ica l Associa tion (AMA). 267.
280.5 I H.5 19
America n Nazi party. 10 5.477
Ameri ca n Politica l Science Association. 10
American Public Transit Association. 269

American Revo lution. 1 7. 18. 20- 2 1. 38.84
American s lo r Constitutiona l Acti on. 280
A meri ca ns for Democra lic Acti on . 28 0

America ns with Disabilities Act (A DA) of 1990.
66- 67.147
America n Te lephone and Telegraph (AT&T).
41>0.488
American way of life. 78
America Votes. 252
A lIl k lis cll riae, 455

Amish sect. 111
Anderso n. joh n. 242
Andrus. Cec il D.. 272
Angola. 534. 536
Annapolis. Ma ry land. 22
An ti appeasement.. See Cont.ainment. policy
Anti-Defa mation League. 267

Antifedera lists. 3.1 . 34. 35.39.201
An ti-jac kson Rep ublica ns. 203
Anti-Masonic party. 203. 212
Anti-Saloon League. 223
Antis lavery orga nization s. 267

An tit rust Di viSio n (justice Depa rtment). 480
An titrust legislati on. 51>.480- 48 1
Antiwar movement. 16 1.22 1- 222. 286. 54 1
AP (ASSOCia ted Press). 295. 299. 305.306
Appell ate courts. See Courts of appea ls
App ropriations bills. 35 1.428.503
Approp riations Comm ittee (House). 342. 345.
42X-429. 501. 568
App ropriations Committee (Senate). 344. 501
App rova l ratings. 39 0- 392
Arab Americans. 531
Arab oil ca rtel. 475
A ri stocracy, 25

Aristotle. 6. 3D
Armed Servi ces Committee (House). 345
Armed Services Commiltee (Senate). 344
Arnold . Thurma n. 480
Art h u r. Chester. 3 n
Articles of Confederation. 1 7.2 1- 22.37 . 52
Consti tution and . 24. 25.26. 31. 34
Asbestos. in public buildin gs. 5h9

II

12

Index
Ash Coun cil ( 1969- 19 7 1).432
Asian American Legal Defense Fund. 272
Asian Ame ricans. 165

Assistance programs. 516 . 518
Assistant minority leader (Senate). 336
Associated Press (A P). 295. 299. 305. 306
Atlantic Legal Foundation. 272
Alirllllic MOIIU /ill (magazine). 295
Attack journa lism. 309
AT&T (America n Telephon e and Telegraph ).
4S0.488
Allitudinal vo tin g. 33 1. 332- 333
Attorney general. 538
Aud iences. of president. 390
Australia. 438.514.545.557
votin g in . 185 . 190.194
Australian ballot. I S 5
Austria. HI . 90. 266
Authority. 5. 200. See also Presidential power
cen tralized . 52. 200
delegation or. to bureaucracy. 41 5
di scretionary. 415
en hanced rescission a uthority. 45.395
formal. pol itical power a nd. 5
political autho ri ty. 20. 46. 200. 265

See also Constitution of U.S.: spC'cific
(lllle/uh,le/its

appl ied to states. 35 . 102.104
text or. A 13-A14
Bills. 347- 356
a mendmenlsto. 352. 354. 356
congressional calendar. 352

11001' debate of. 353- 355
introduction of. 34H. 350
riders to. 354
steps in legislative process. 348- 349
study by committees. 348. 350- 353
voting meth ods. 355- 356
Bimodal distribution of votes. 338
Bindi ng presidential preference primary. 241
Bin Laden. Os"ma. 88. 120. 5 33 . 539. 555
Bipartisan Campaign Finan ce Rerorm Act

interest groups and. 508. 588

(2002).250.251 - 252
Bipo la r wo rld . 555
Black. Hugo. 106.439
Blackmun. Harry. 447. 464
Blacks. See Arrica n Americe:lIl s
Bla ckstone. Willi"m. 102- 103
Blair. Tony. 370
Blanket prima ry. 24 1
Block grants. 63- 64. 65.523
devo lution and. 49. 50.68- 69
Blogs (web logs). 292. 293. 29 7
Blount. William . 3S
Blue-collar workers. 163.54 1
"Blue Dog Democrats" (The Coalition ). 341
"Blue slip." 447
Boland. Edward. 53 7
Bola nd Amendment ( 19 82- 1985). 537
Bonior. lJavid. 544
130rder Patrol. 424
Boren's Laws. 426
Bork. Robert. 438
Bosnia. 540. 544, 555 . 557
Boston. Massachu setts. 133.266. 298
Boston Tea Party. 25.30
/3owers v. Hardwick (]986). 150
Boy Scouts of America. 10 1.268
/3oll Scollls 0/ /llIIericn v 0,,11' (2 000). I 50. 15]
Bradley. Bill. 225. 233
Brady. Jim. 282
Brady bill (1993 ). 282. 445 . 478
Brandeis. Louis. 446. 46 1
Brandenburg. Clarence. 104
Braun. Carol Moseley. 325- 326
Brazil. 482
Breckinridge. John c.. 205- 206

over con diti ons of aid. 68

Brennan. William. 132

Aut.h orii!:a lion legislation. 428

Automobile manufacturers. 268. 271. 469.
484.485.565
Automobiles
em issions standards for. 561. 564- 566
sa fety standards for. 470-471. 474. 478.
484.485
union (UAW). 11. 216. 565 . 568
"Average person " standard. 10 7

AV F (a ll -voluntee r force). 550
Babbitt. Bruce. 572
Background story. 313
Baker.lloward. 233. 382
Bakke. Ala n. 147.455
Bakke case (1978). 147.149.455
Balanced budget. 502
Balanced Budget Acl (1985 ).504-505
Balanced budget amendment. 28(fn.). 43. 45.
506
Ballots. 149.185. 198.207.236
Ba nkin g. I-lousi ng and Urban Affairs Committee (Senate). 344
Bank regulation. 476. 500
Bargaining
in Cong ress. 356

Bayh . Birch. 21 7
Bay of Pigs invasion. 540
Beard. Charles. 38
Beliefs. 11. 77. 91. 92(ng.). 159. 160
cost-benent ana lysis and. 487
Benents. See Costs and benents
I3crman. ll m·vard L.. 215
Bernstein. Carl. 300
Bias. 278-279
in media. 29 3. 303-307
Bica mera l legislature. 25. 32 1
Big Brothers Big Sisters of America. 515
Big governm ent. 470

Bi lin gual edu cati on. 101
Bi ll of allai nder. 35
Bill of Hight s (l 79 1). 34-36. 9S- 99. I I I.
450

Breyer. Stephen. 454(tab.). 456
Bribery. 285. 3 )9. See also Cor rupti on
Briers. 455
Broad-based aid. 63- 64
Broadcast media. See Media
Broder. David. 233
Brown. Corrine. 34 1
Brown. Linda. 129. 131. 132.453
Brmvn, Pal. 2 1 7
Brown. Ronald H.. 2 12
Brownlow Commission ( 1936- 19 37). 432
13rowII v. 130111-(/0/ EdllcatiOll (1954). 129. I 3 I .
134.453.462
Bryan. Wi lliam Jennings. 2()3. 206
Bubb le sta ndard. 57 1
Buchanan . James. 38X

Buchanan. Pat. 250. 54g

Buddy system. in bureau cracy. 418-419
Budget and Accounting Act (192 1). 380
Budget Com mill ee (House). 345. 50J. 504
Budget Commillee (Senate). 344. 501. 504
Budget dencit. 70. 70(ng. ). 359.428-429. 549
See also Ba lanced budget: Federal budget
economic policy and. 492. 496. 499.
5()4- 505
projections. 494. 494(l1 g.)
Bud get En forcemen t Act ( 1990). 50S
Bu dget Reform Act ( 1974).397
Budget reso lution s. 503. 504
Budget surplus. 52 I
"Bull Moose" (Progressive) party. 221. 222.
223
Bully pulpit. 39 0
Bureau cracy. 40.2 13.409-436
agency a llies. 426-427
appointment or onk ials in. 41 7-418 . 434
buddy system. 41 X- 4 19
bureau cratized parties. 208- 209
change of role 01'.423
congressional. 345
congressiona l oversight 01'. 420-421.423.
424. 427- 430. 433
constraint s on, 424- 42fi
culture of. 423
distinct iveness of. 4 10-41 1
divided government and. 433

economic policy and. 423.
European. 41 I. 584
growth or. 4 I 1-4 14

sao

language 0 1'. 425
"lm'\'5" or. 426

modern. 4 14-427
in parliamentary system s. 4 -10.584

"pathologies." 430- 432
poli cy-making and. 422
politica l innovat ion by. 472
power or. 4 I 5
presidency a nd . 397. 398.433
red tape and. 425-426. 430. 431. 432-433
reform movements. 412. 41 7-418. 432-433
service role of. 4 I 2-414
spoils system (patronage). 4 12. 4J 7.4 18
we lfare and. 51 5

White I louse. 3S I. 382
Bureaucratization. 5H2
Bureaucra ts
agency cul ture (:Ind. 423

agency point of view and. 420-42 1
behavior of. 423
da ily duties. 418
I1rin gs. 4 19- 420
personal at tributes or. 421-422
power of. 9. 42 3
recruitment and retentio n. 41 5-419
sabotage of superiors. 420 . 422-423
Bureau of Competition. 423
Bureau of Eco nom ics. 423
Bureau of the Budget. See OI'l1ce of Management a nd Budget
Burger. Warren. 133 . 447.464
Bu rn elt. Carol. 105
Burnham. Walter Dea n. 329
Burns. Arthur II.. 50 I
Burr. Aa ron. 376
Bus boycotl. 1 35
Bu sh. George II. W. (elder). 144.2 16-217. 3 I 3
appointments by. 427

Index
battles wi th Con gress. 370-37 1
cha racLCr of. 389
deregula tion and. 4 89
election of 1988 a nd. 234. 237 . 23 9. 2 56
electi on of 1992 a nd . ] H7. 243. 495
cll viro n m cnlCl I reg u lati o n a nd. 567

judicia l a ppoi ntm ents by. 4 38. 448
opposition to ma ndates. 66. 6 7
presidency of. 369. 378. 39 2. 393(l1g.) .
398.400
lax increase and . 509
usc of mi litary force by. 533 . 534 . 540. 544
as vice presiden t. 233 . 4 0J
Bu sh. Geo rge W. (youn ger). 11 . 6 1. 64. 233
on ilfflrm ati ve acti on, 148

appoin tme nt s by. 4 17
cabinet of. 369. 386. 387
cha racter of. 38 9
ch ild-welfare a nd . 4 26
community-se r ving organi za ti ons a nd. 62
"compassionate conser va ti sm " of. 584

Byrd . Ha rry. jr.. 2 18
Byrd fa mily. 2 1 7
Cl\B (Civil Aerona utics Board ). 28 0 . 4 88 . 489
I( Chavez-Sa/ido ( 198 2 ). 146

Cab,,11

Cabin et
A fri ca n A m erican s in. 387

choosin g membe rs of. 369
conl'lict with preside ntial staff. 387-388
preside nt a nd. 369. 384- 385. 384(ta b.).
38 5( tab. ). 4 11 -4 12
Cabi net COlllllliLtcc 0 11 Economic Security. 5 17 .

5 18
Cab le r\e ws Netwo rk (CNN) . 243. 297 . 29 9 .
3I I

Cable television. 2 9 7. 298 . 30 8 . 3 11
Ca lendar of business (Sena te) . 352
"Ca lend ar Wedn esday proced ure." 353
Ca lho u n. jo hn C.. 56. 3 76
Ca li fo rn ia. 52. 149. 165 . 2 1 5.235.517.52 4
no faul t a uto in sura nce in. 27 2

COll rt nom in atio ns o f'. 4 38

redistri ctin g in . 3 29

doc trine of preem pti on a nd. -' 5 5
educa ti on reform s of. 5 24

sa m e-sex marri age in. 151

election of 2000 a nd. 84. 22 5.234.2 4 8 .
251. 30 9. 376
election of 2004 a nd . 18 6. 2 11. 2 19. 2 39 .
240. 24 2. 248- 249 .25 0
environmental policy a nd . 560. 56 5
fa it h-based groups a nd . 5 15

stale constituti o n o f. 59

Ca li forn ia Public Util ity Commission . 108
Ca loriC Contro l Coun cil. 28 2
Ca mbodia . 534 . 54 0
Ca mbridge. Massac hu setts. 2 19
Cameron. Simon. 386

Ca mpaign deba te. 242 . 244. 30 2

farm subsid ies and. 483

Ca mpa igners. 188

II rst inaugu ra tion of. 374

Ca m pa ign I1n a ncin g. 8 . 2 33 . 244- 247 .
25 0- 2 5 3
federal gra nls. 244- 24 5. 246- 247
new sources of. 25 1- 252
PAC, an d. 2 4 5. 28 2- 283 . 284
relo rm of. 25 0 . 28 2 .5 88
ru les of. 109. 246- 247 .2 50- 25 1. 287
soft money. 20 9 . 247. 250
sou rces of. 244- 246

fundi ng ror fai t h-based organ iza ti ons. 2 77
hea lth ca re legislati on a nd. 522

interest gro ups and. 272
judicia l a ppoin tments by. 448
Kyoto Protocol and. 561
Latinos and. 166. 30 3
ma le support for. 160
, Al\ CI' and . 165
nat ional cri ses un der. 398

pe rsona l foll owin g of. 21 6 . 2 17
popu la rity of. 393(ng.)
on racia l profilin g. 139
Soc ia l Secu rity reform and. 512. 520
tax c uts of. 49 3. 50 9
taxes on im ported steel and. 50 2
unilled government a nd. 370
veLD pO\·ver and , 396

wa r on terro rism and. 120 . 360. 368. 389.
399 . 400. 533
Bush. jeb. 216. 217
BlIsil v. Gore (2000) . 2 5 1
Busi ness. See a/so Busin ess regulation
institution a l in terests. 267. 278
labor ri ghts and. 48 1-482
plant cl osin g notiil ca tion cmd . 47 6
po wer eli te in . 9. 479
public confidence in. 309
red ta pe in . 4 30
BUSin ess-orien ted interest groups. 267 . 278
Busin ess regul ation. 443 . 479-485
cli ent politics a nd . 482-484. 488 . 48 9
deregu lation a nd. 488-489
entrepreneurial politics and. 484-485 . 487

int e rest gro up politi cs a nd. 4S 1-482
limits of ideas and . 489
majorita ri a n politics a nd. 480-48 1
Busi ng. 133- 1 34. 463
federal mandates for. 67

w innin g and , 252- 2 5 3

Ca mpaigns. 2 30- 2 6 2. 25 b- 2 57
Sc(' also Congression a l ca m piligns; Presidenti a l ca mpa igns

debates. 242. 2 44. 30 2
direcl-mail. 209. 2 1 5. 243-2 4 4. 247 .
257
fra nked ma il a nd. 253
In ternet a nd. 209. 243 . 29 7. 303
ki nds of issues in . 2 3 9- 240
nega ti ve ads. 2 34. 2 57. 26 1. 3 10
par tisa n loyal ty a nd. 2 56- 257
pri mary vs. ge nera l. 2 37-2 4 4
strategy and the mes. 2 34. 25 7
television a nd . 240. 242. 24 3. 244. 25 7
Ca mpa ign speeches. 2 4 2- 24 3
Ca mpa ign sta ff. 2 33- 23 4
Ca mpbel l. Be n Nightho rse. 32 6
Ca nada . 2 1. 80. 84 (tab.). 189- 19 0. 438
acid ra in a nd. 566. 567
jud icia l review in . 4 62
tradc with . 502
Ca ncer. th reat of. 569 . 57 1
Ca ndidates . 579
cha racte r of. 252 . 257
lo r Congress. 3 I 8
I1 na ncing for. 233 . 25 0- 253 . 282 . 283
"ment ion" and. 233 . 300
presidential. 23 1. 29 7.3 00. 30 2
Sp,m ish-spea ki ng vo ters and. 30 3

Ca nnon . Iloward. 488
Canno n. joseph G.. 32 1. 323 . 342
Ca pi ta l gra n ts. 69
Capita lism. 479
Ca pit a lists. 9, 79
Capita l punishmenl. 45~
Ca pit ol buildin g. map or. 337

Carbo n diox ide. 560. 563
Ca ri bbea n. ma p of U.S. inter ven ti ons in . 54 7
See !I /so Cuba: sfJe('ilk is/mll/s
Ca rlyle. Thomas. 4 32
C!lm!l / Know/edge (111m ). 10 6
Carson. Rachel. 568
Ca rter. ji mmy. l 67 . 20 C, . 233 . 4 75
cha racter of. 389
deregul ation and . 488 . 48 9
election of 1976 a nd. 2 34. 2 39 . 24 0
electi on of 1980 a nd. 242. 255. 495 . 501
energy bi ll of. 3 51. 356
foreign policy under. 533
infl ation and . 496
Iran hostage crisis a nd. 5 3 3
judgesh ips and. 4 6 ]
media a nd. 313
"mentioned." 30 0
nation al crises unde r. 39 8
OSHA adm inistration a nd. 4 82
policies of. 39 7
presidency of. 272.369. 370. 382 . 38 8.
39 1. 392 . 393( llg.) . 39 4. 4 27. 447
Senate a nd . 368 . 37 1
visit to Cuba by. 532
Cast.ro. Fidel. 532
Categorica l gra nt s. 63- 65 . 6 6. 6 8
Catholic Cha rities. 277 . 5 1 5
Cat holics. 85 . 87 . 95( fi g.) . 100 . I 59 . I (>O(tab.).
20 6.2 12
Kenn edy a nd. 253. 258 . 587
pa roc h ia l sch ools. 99. 1 11 - 11 2. 4 53
Cato Institute. 273
Ca ucuses. 20 2. 225. 23 1. 2 3 7
co ngressiona l. 340-3 4 1. 34 1(tab.) . 34 3
Democratic. 34 2
Iowa ca ucus. 237- 238 . 300
\vo mcn's issues and. 275
CBC (Con greSSiona l Black Ca ucus) . 340-341
CBO (Congressiona l Bu dget Office). 70 . 347 .
494.5 0 3
CBS network . 292 . 296. 299. 307. 3 10.452
CEA (Council of Eco nom ic Advisors) . 383 .499
Censorship. 99.10 3.10 7. 300. 488
Census. U.S.
distributiona l fo rmu las a nd . 65. 24 8
red istricting a nd. 32 7. 329. 33 0
Center lo r Defense Informa tio n. 2 73
Cen ter for Individua l Rights. 2 72. 45 1
Cen ter fo r Strategi c a nd Intern ati ona l Stu di es.

273
Center on Budget a nd Policy Priorities. 273
Cen tra l America . U.S. interventions in. 54 7
Cent ral In tell igence Agen cy (CIA). 383 .41 7.
4 24 .45 3
fo reign policy a nd . 532 . 5 37. 538- 53 9
Cent ra lized power (a uthority ). 52.2 00
C('rtiom!';, w rit of. 4 50-45 1. 4 55
Chad. 534
C/llld/lll case( 19 83). 4 2 9. 53 7
Chain of cOlllmand . mi li tary. 55 4-555
Cha irman of the Caucus (I louse) . 336
Chai rm a n of the Confere nce (Uouse) . 33 6

13

Index

14

Chairman of the Conference (Senale). 336
Chamberlain . Nev ille. 543
Ch a mber of Commerce. U.S .. 109.2(,7.269.
280
Cllllplil/sky 1'. New 1IIIIIIpsilire (1942). 109
Chapman's Rules of Committees. 426

Character
or ca ndidates. 252. 2:; 7

of presidents. 388- 389
Charitable Choice. 51 :;

CharIer of Rights (Canada). 462
Chase. Samue ll~. 386.46 1
Checks and ba la nces. 29. 30. 58 I
Cheney. Dick. 299. 335.402
Cllewv. Coldil/g(1953). 146
Chicago. Illi nois. 67. 2 14. 266. 298. 541
Chief justice. Suprem e Cou rt. 349(tab.). 455
Child-ca re programs. 522. 526
Chi ld pornography. 107
Ch ildre n's Defense Fund. 273
Ch ildren's Protection and Toy Safety Act
(1969 ). 484(fn. )
Chinese Amcricans. 1 8 1
Chi nese Re vo lution. 17
Christian Coalition. 83. 269. 280
Christmas tree bill. 3 '>4
Church ill. Winston. 543
CIA. See Cen tral lnlelli gcncc Age ncy
Ci nci nnati. Ohio. 298
Circular staff structure. 38 I. 382
Cities
election s in. 2 19
existe nce of. 59
lederal agencies and. 41 I
gover nment. 57.63
interest groups in. 266
in tergovernmenta l lobbics. 62
munic ipal bonds. 56
pollution contro ls in. 564
regulations in. 482
Citi,ens hip. 3'>. 67. 145
Civic com petence. 80
Civic d uty. 77. 80. R2- 8 3
Civic participation. 8. 82. 162
Civic problems. va lues and. 9 I
Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB). 280 . 488.489
Civi l disobed ience. 135
Civil ity in Cong ress. decline of. 333-334
Civi l li berties. 97-123. See also First Amendment
civil rights and. 99
cri me and d ue process. 11 3-12 1
cu lt ural eo nllicts and. 100-102
politics. cultu re and. 99- 100
Supreme Court and. 462
terrorism and. J 19-121
Civil rights. 124- 152.4] 6. '>81. 58'>-588
a fO r malive acti o n . 144- 149. 169.399.448
black predicament and. 12'>.126- 127
Browl/ v. BOllrd of Edllcaliol/ (19'>4). 129.
131. 134.4'>3.462
ca mpaig n in Congress. 1 34-139
ca mpaig n in federa l co u rts. 127- 1 34.462
citi zens hip and. 145
civi l liberties and. 99
of disabled persons. 14 7
of homosex ua ls. See Il omosex ua l (gay)
rights
of illegal aliens. 146
Ja pilllcse American internment.
opinion on. 169
racial proillin g an d, -139

535

separate-but-equa l doctrine and. 128- 129
of women. See Women's rights
Civ il Righls Act of 1957. I 37
Civ il Ri ghls Ac t of 1964. 137. 14 1. 182.457.
459
Civil Ri ghts Act of 1965.137
Civil Ri ghts Acl of 1968. 137
Civ il Righls Act of 1972. 14 1
Civil Righls Acl of 1988. 1 37 . 14 1
Civ il Rights Act of 199 1. 141
Civil rig hts cases. 45 1--452. 460
Si'l! a/so spedjk ('(/se

Civi l ri g hts legis latio n. 5 I
Cong ress and. L 37- 13~. 350-35 1
key provis ions of. 1 38
la bor uni o ns a nd . 11. 273
mandates. 66. 67
representati ona l voting on .

331

Southern Democrats sup port fo r. 139(lig.)
vague language in. 459
Civil righ ts movement. 127. J35. 286. See also
Na tional Assoc iat ion for the Adva ncement of Colored People
disruptive ta ctics of. 135. 136
in federa l courts. 127-134
religion an d. S 3
white o ppositi on to. 136- 1 37
Civil serv ice . 2 J 4. Sa (I/so Burea ucra cy
re i'orm o f. 2 1 3- 2 14. 4 1 7--41 S. 419
Civ il Ser vice Reform Act (1978). 4 19
Civil Wa r. 5. n. 378
bu rea ucrati c g rowth in . 412
nalional suprem acy and. 54.442
party rea lignment and. 205- 206

seclionalism in. 203- 204
sla ver y and. 37. 56. 205- 20b
velera ns' pcn sions. 267.4 13.495
Clar ity sta nd a rd . 10 7
Class-aclion s uits. 453--454
Class consciousncss. 1;6. See also Socia l class:

specijic dl/ss
Class po liti cs. 507
Clay. lI enry. 376
Clayb rook. Joa n . 4~5
Clayto n Acl (191 4). 480
Clea n Ai r Act ( 1970). 378. 484( fn. ). 561. 563.
564
Clea n Ai r Act ( 1990) . 378 .565 . 567
Clean Wa ter Acts. 564
Clear-and-presenl-danger test. ] 03-104
Cleveland. Grover. 204. 240. 377. 378. 380
patronage jo bs an d. 41 7
veto pm·ver an d. 395
Clien t politics. 2S0 . 284 . 426. 476(lig.)
business reg ul ation and. 482--484. 488.
489
econo mic po li cy a nd. 497.502
e nviro nme nta l policy. 563. 568- 569
fo reign policy and. 531
mi litary rea dincss and. 553
po licy-makin g process a nd. 477--478.
482--484
socia l welfa re and. 5 11. 5 1 3. 524- 525. 526
laxes and. 50S. 508
Clinlo n . Bi ll. 69. 167.234.242.540.549
afi1rmativc acti on {Ind. 399
appointmcnts by. 385.42 1--422.427.447.
448
appoi ntmen ls of. 50l
bud ge t an d. 504
cabinet of. 3~ 7

character o f. 389
Cong ress and. 37 1.492
election of 1992 a nd. 1 67. 187.2 19 .
239- 240.243.256.3 09. 37 1. 495
environmenta l protcction and. 572
farm subsid ies and. 483
fo reig n policy und er. 533. 544-545
gays ill military a nd. :; 5 1
as gove rn or. 233.369
heallh care plan of. 280.368.38 1
impeachment o f. 87. 33 I . 333. 338 . 368.
403
Kyoto Protoco l and. 56 ]
line-item veto an d. 43
Medicare reform a nd. 52 1- 522
Microsoft and. 480
military act ions direc ted by. 555
nationa l criscs under. 398
policies of. 397
popularity of. 392. 393(fi g.)
presidency of. J 51. 272. 368. 374. 387.
400
on ra cia l proilling. 1 39
ree lection of. in 1996.262
Senate and. 536
sex ua l conduct of. J 4 2. 3 JO. 3 11 .396
Socia l Securi ty reform and. 520
sLafr organizaLion of. 383
Lax increase and. 509
welfare reform and. 68. 378- 379
CIin ton. George. 23
Clin lon. Hill a ry Rodham. 240.3 09. 38 J
Clillt oll eL al. v. New York etlli. ( 1998).45
Closed primary. 24 1
Closed rule. 352
Clol hespin vo te. 239
Cloture. 354. 355
CN (Cab le News Netwo rk ). 243. 297 . 299.
3 11
Coa l-burn in g. su lfur emissions a nd. 566- 567
Coa li tio n . The ("B lue Dog De mocra ts") . 34 1
Cmili tio ns. 34. 34 1
Christ ian Coal ition. 83. 269. 28 lJ
conservative coa lition. 330. 333. 582
divided governmcnt a nd.

372

in Europe. 2J 9 - 220
"New Deal" coalition . 206 . 259
parliamentary. 369
party organization a nd. 200. 202. 206. 2 J 9
policy-making and. 475. 489
w in ni ng. in elec ti ons. 257-259
Coatta il s. 232.391
Coca-Cola Company. 182
Cohen. Wilbur. 518
Cold war. 548. 555
Cold W(II: '('lIe (Lippm an). 542
Colleges and uni ve rsities. 579. See "Iso III/der
Student: specific il/still/tiol/s
admissions policies 01'.1 47.149.448
a nti-b usi ness val ucs in. 479
a nti war scn tim ent a nd . 54 1

freedom of speec h in . 93
integration or. J 29. 130. 1 32
land-gra nt colleges. roo
libera lizi ng effec t of. 136. 161. 267
po liti ca l correctness o n. 162
sex disc riminati on a nd. 14 1

voting a nd . 188. 19 1

Col/ill" SlIlitli ( 1978). 109
Colonists. views of liberty. 84
Colo rado. 148. 149. 150.377

Index
COllllllblls Dispatch (newspaper). 300
Comma nd-and-control strategy. 570- 57 1. 572
Comma llCicr in chief. 378. 379- 380.440. 532.
540. 546. 554. See also Presidentia l

Congress. 581

caucuses. See Cauclises

pay raise for. 362
plant clOSin g bill and. 476
policy preferences in. 171
politica l elites in. 17 1
political parties and. 200.319. 328-330.
334- 337
pork-barrel legislation. 358 . 35 9.477
power of. 317. 320. 321. 364-3 65
powers an d perks. reduci ng. 358-3 59
presidency and. 373 . 37 5- 379. 380.
390- 39 1. 39 1(tab. ). 393( fi g.)
presidential veto and. 43-45 . 348. 358 .
395 . 396

COlllmiLtee clearance. 429

chan ges in. 580

qualiDcations and privileges 0 1', 238

Committee of Detai l. 27
Committee on Agin g (Sena te). 344
Committee on Com mittees (Senate) . 33 5. 336.
337
COlll mittees (Co ngress). See also Congressiona l

checks and ba lances and. 29

radioactive waste and , 56 1

child welfare and. 526
chronology of congresses. A 30- A32
church an d slate and. III
civil rights legislation and. 137- 138

regulation of commerce by. 53-54. 57.413
representational voting in. 33 1-332

antitrust legislation and. 480

COIll /ll e/lll/ries (Bla ckstone). 103
Commerce. regulation of. 53- 54. 4 J 2.4 13.
442.445
Commerce. Science and Tran sportation Committee (Senate). 344
Commerce Department. 4 13. 537

apPOi ntment of orncials and. 4 12. 4 19-420
altitudinal votin g in . 33 1.332- 333
Bill of Hights and. 3)
Brady bill a nd. 478
budget and. 397. 4 28- 429.503- 50 4
bureau cracy of. 411
burea ucratic oversight by. 420-42 1. 423.
424. 427-43 0.4 33
bureau cratic power and. 4J 5

COlllmi ssion on Ba se Reali gnment and Closure.

ca mpaign ilnancc reform and, 25 0

jJmvcr

553

co mmitt ees: specific CO llll/Jitree
conferen ce. 3 S6

legislati ve. 428
select co mmittees . 342
seniority and cha irman ship in. 323. 338 .
339- 340.342.363
standin g committ ees. 342. 344. 345
su bcommittees. 34 1. 342 . 343. 346
Commodi ty Credit Corporati on. 482
CO llllll on Ca Li se. 277
Comm un a lists. 1 88

Communist Cont rol Act (1954) . 100
Communist party. 100. 104.221
Comm unists. 92. 92(fig.)
COlllmunity-based organization s. 69
Communi ty Development Block Gra nt s. 64
"Community-needs" broadcasting. 30 ]

Comlllun it y servi ce. 80. 162. I X3 . 188

civil ser vice reform and. 4 19
cOlllmittees of. See Congressiona l cOlllmit-

tees: specific rOil/mittel'S
co ngressional calendar. 352
Co nservative coalition in. 5X2

constituencies and. 320. 33 0- 334
Constitutional amendments and. 28. 42
Co nstitutiona l powers of. 26. 27. 55- 56
courls and. 446. 460. 46 1-463
decentrali 7.atio nlrend in. 320. 322.
342-343
Democratic control of. 260 . 518. 523
deregulat ion and. 488
desegregation. 131. I 34- 139
devolution and. 68-69
di stricts or. See Con grcssional di stri cts:
Redi st.r icting
di vided government Clnd. 370-372

in burea ucracies. 430. 43J

"Do Not Ca ll" law and. 473
economi c poli cy and. 492.501 - 50 2
environmcnla ll aw and. 563
ethics rules. 360
evolution of. 32 1-3 25
excl usionary ru le and. J 18- 11 9
exempt from laws. 358
farm price supports and. 482. 483
fed era l aid and. 6 1. 64-66
fed eralism and. 53.66- 67 . 70.72
flag-burning law and. 108
fl oor debate in . 353- 355
foreign pol icy role of. 531 - 532. 538
I louse-Senate dil'!Crences. 323 . 356
ideology and civility in. 333- 334
impoundment of fund s a nd. 396-3 97
incumbency and. See I ncumbcncy
independent counsel and . 404
interest groups and. 28 1. 320. 332. 344.
35 1
labor disputes a nd. 267
legislative process in. 347- 356. 358
legislati ve velo and. 400. 429
lobbyi ng and. 287
map of Capi tol bu ildin g. 337

between cabinet and staff. 3H7- 3XS

military and. 552.55 3.5 54

cost-benefit analysis and. 4H7
cultural. 86- 87 . 100- 101
in Icdera l-state rela tion s. 49
in int erest group polit.ics. 28 I
over slavery. 49. 20 5-2 06. Seeo /so Civil War
in politics. 28 1

nuclear waste storage a nd. 486
I 04th Co ngress. 49. 69. 340. 342. 358
109th Co ng ress. 512. 56 7
organizational voti ng in. 33 1. 332
organizati on of. 345- 34 7
PACs and. 282-283 . 28 4(tab. }
parliament compared. 3 I 8- 32 I. 35 9. 37 1
party unity in. 338- 340

relig ious-based. 82 . 84. 94
"Compassionate conser vati sm." 584

Competition. 587
for fede ra l jobs. 416
in media. 298- 299. 31O- 3J J
Competitive Enterprise Institute. 273
Competitive service (burea ucracy) . 4 16
Comprehensive Environmental Response. Com-

pensat ion. a nd Liability Act (CEHCLA.
19 80). 570. See also Superfund
Computeri7.ed ma ilin gs. 208 . See I/Iso
Di rect-ma il solicitation

Computers. 41 3. See (llso Internet
Co ncurrent powers. 29

Co ncur re nt resol ution . 35 0, 536
Co ncur rin g opinion. 4 55

Co ndit. Ga ry. 3 11
Co nfederal system. 51. )3(fig.)
Co nfederation . 5 1. 53(fig.}
Co nference comm ittees. 342
Co nfessions and sell~ in cr iminati on. I J 7- ] 18
Confidenti a lity. presidential. 396
Confident ia lity of sources. media and. 30 I
Connict

wit hi n upper middle cla ss . 278

Con fli ct of interest. 28 5

sca nda ~ i n. 33 Q 333

sedition law and. 100. 103
seniority system in. Sec Seniority
separati on of powers and. 40. 42-43
si7.e of. 357
slavery and. 19. 36. 37
Socia l Security and. 495 .51 4
stand ing and. 452. 453
state mi litia s a nd. 60
state sovereignt y and, 58
Supreille Court and. 438 . 459
television coverage of. 307. 308
term limits in. 327. 342 . 345. 358
terrorist legislation a nd. ] 20. 12 1.
359- 362
treaty with Britain ( 1783 ).2 1
votin g in. 236- 237 . 33 1-333. 338. 344.
355-3 56
\tVal" PO\·ve rs Ac t a nd. 5 36

womcn and minoriLi es in, 325- 326 ,
325(tab.)
wo men in mililary an d, S50
wo men's ri ghts and. 140
Congressional Accou ntabi lity Act (1995). 358
Congressional Black Ca ucus (CBe). 340- 341
Congressional Budget Act ( 1974). 50 3. 504
Congressiona l Budget OfOce (CBO). 70. 347.
494. 503
Congressional cal en dar. 352
Congressional campa ign committee,

208
Congression al campa igns. 232-2 37. 33 1
funding for. 244-245. 245(flg .). 246
presidential campai gns and. 232- 2 34
TV ads and. 302-3 03
Congressional Committee (Democratic). 209
Congression al committees. 319. 336. 34 1-345
See a/so Committees (Congress): specific
CO II/l1litl et!

conference committee. 356
economic policy and. 501. 503
growth in. 346(ftg.)
bearlngL 307. 308. 35 1
[-l ouse. 342. 343. 345
legislative process and. 350-353
reform of. 342
Senate. 342. 343. 344
seni ority in. 323. 338. 339- 340
subcoillmittees. 34 1. 342. 343. 346
Congressio nal distri cts
1990 census a nd. 327. 329 . 33 0
courts a nd. 457
margina l vs, safe, 327
pork-barrcl legislation and, 359

redistrictin g. 235- 236 . 339

15

16

Index
Congressional elections . L8 L. 2 25

of 1938. 39 0
01'1 974.333
of 1982. 260
of 1986. 183
of 1994.3 33
01'2002.183
gender gap in. 160- 161
in cumbency advantage in . 253(tab.). 282.
327- 328
PAC I1nancin g. 283
partisan gains in. 394(tab.)
presidential popula rity and. 39 ]
Republican success in. 328- 329. 329(tab.)
ticket-splitting in . 207
turnout in. 187
Congressiona l ethics. ru les of. 360
Congressional Governlllent (Wilson). 379
Congressiona l investigations. 30 7. 308.
43J-432.538
Congression al oversight. 420-42 ]. 423 . 424.
427-4 30.4 33
Congressional Record. 238
Congressional reform s. 3 J 7
Congressiona l Research Service. 347
Congressiona l staffs. 345- 34 7. 346( l1 g.). 582
Co nnally. Tom. 536
Co nn ecticut. 20. 27(fn .). 37. 306
Co nn ecticut Compromi se. 26- 27
Connor. Eugene ("B ull" ). 136
Consent ca lendar (House). 352
Conserva tism. 1 70(tab.). 2 J 5
in bureaucracy. 422
"compassionate. " 584

congressiona l Republican s. J 71.339
interest groups. 45 J . 452
judges. 446
judicia l review a nd. 4 39
meaning of term. 168- 169
military spending and. 548
publ ic-in te rest law firms. 272
in Senate. 332. 333
ta lk shows. 303. 304- 305
think tanks. 273
welfare and. 52 3
Conservative coalition. 33 0. 333. 582
Conservati ve party (Britai n). 260
Considine. Bob. 99
Constitu encies. 320. 330- 33 4
attitudinal voting and. 332-333
orga nil':Cltional votin g a nd . 33 1. 332

representation votin g and. 33 1- 332
Constituency-based caucuses. 340. 34 1{tab.)
Constitution. English. 18
Constitutional Amendments. 5
First Amendmen t. See First Amendment
(1791 ).A J 3
Second Amendment (1791).36.102 . A13
Third Amendment (J 79 1). 102. A I 3
Fourth Amcndment (179 J). 36.4l.11 4. A13
Fifth Amendment (1 79 ] ). 36. 4l. 102. 114.
A13
Sixth Amendment (] 79 1).3 6.41. A I 3
Seventh Amendment (179 1).3 6.102. A14
Ei ghth Amendment (1 79 1). 36. 102.457.
A14
Ni nth Amendment (1791 ). 36. A14
Te nth Amendmen t (1 79 J ). 36. 53. 58. 66 .
67. 142. A14
Eleventh Amendment (1795).58.445.
46]. A14

Twelfth Amendment (J 804) . 376. A14
Thirteenth Amendment (1795 ). 461. A l 5
Fourteenth Amendment. See Fourteenth
Amendment (1868). A15
Filreenth Amendment (1870). J 81. 443 .
46l. AJ6
Sixteenth Amendment (1913). 414.507. A16
Seventeenth Amendmen t (1791).324. 36 1.
A16
Eighteenth Amendment (1919 ). A 17
Nineteenth Amendm en t (1920). 4 J . 140.
182. A] 7
Twentieth Amendment (19 33 ). A.1 7
Twenty-nrst Amendment ( 1933).28.4.1. A18
Twenty-second Amendment (19 51).373.
4tH. A18
Twenty-th ird Amendment (1961 ). 183.
A18
Twenty-fourth Amendment (1964). A 19
Twenty-filth Amendment (J 967).384.402.
A19
Twenty-sixth Amen dment ( 1971). 183.
461. A20
text of. A1 3- A20
Constitutional am endments. proposed

ba lanced bud get amendment. 28 (fn .). 43.
45 . 506
Equal Rights Amendment. 274 . 27 5
nag-burning. 108
Constitut ional Convention (17 87) . 5.22- 27
See ,,/so Framers of Constitution
economic interests. 37- 38
plan for federalism. 52- 53
politica l history a nd. 22- 23
Shayss Rebellion and. 23-24. 25
state constitutions an d. 22-23
Constitutiona l Co uncil (France). 438. 462
Constitutiona l courts . 446
Constitutional Union party. 205
Constitution of U.S .. 7. 16-47.60. 200. 578
See also Constitutiona l Convention: Framers
of Constitution
A mendm ents to. Sef Co nstitutional

Amendments

authority of. 5
Bill of Rights. See Bill or Rights
checks and balan ces in . 29
criti cism of. 40. 4 2- 45. 85
democracy and. 25. 27- 30
elections in. 18 1
eq ua l protection of law. 12 7- 128
federa l welfare and. 517
Great Comprom ise. 26-27
gua rantee of indi vidual liberty in . 24- 25
homc'sex ual ri ghts and. 149- 1 51
on House or Representatives. 235
judicia l review and. 45. 439. 440. 44J
lan gu age of. 41
liberty and . 17- 19. 30-31. 34- 35 . 84
need for bill of ri ghts. 34-3 6
New Jersey Plan for. 25- 26
power-sharing and. 309. 379
on powers of Con gress. 26. 27. 55- 56. 32 0
preamble to. 15 5
presidency and. 397
ratifica tio n of. 3l. 38-39
rights. 535. See "Iso Civil rights
sepa rati on of powers. .\'ee Separation of

powers

sign ing of. 21
si lence on slavery. 36- 37. 38

on state -federal re lation s. 53 . 5.5 . 59

stales and . 50
structure. 58.5
text of. A4- A20
Virginia Plan lor. 2 5. 26
ways of amendin g. n. 28( fn. ). 42
women and. 4 1
Consumer activ ists. 4 19. 42 7. See also Nilder.

Ralph
Consu mer Federa tion of America. 28 0
Consu mer protection laws. 12
Consumers. farm prices and. 4 82
Containmen t policy. 542-543. 544. 545. 548
Continen tal Congress. 37
Continuity of Government Comm ission. 3 J 7.
360- 36 1.362
Con tracts. 35
Con tras (Nica rag ua). 53 l. 53 2. 538. 544
Contribu to ry (insuran ce) progra ms. 516. 518
Cook County. Illinois. 2 J4
Coo lidge. Ca lvin . 378.401
Corn ell Universi ty Medica l School. 125
Corporate fund ing. 250
PACs and. 28 2. 28 3
Corporations. 44 3. See ,,/so Business: Industry
economic plClllnin g and. 498

fo reign policy a nd . 53 1
free-speech rights of. 10 3.108- 109
mi litary lies to. 547
policy a nd . 469
Cor ruption
bribery. 285.359
in iJefense Department. 284
reform era and . 204

regulation of lobbyin g and. 287
Corwin. Edward . 532
Coslllopolitall (ma gazine). 295
Cost of Living Coun ci l. 41 4
Cost overruns. in military. 55] - 552
Costs an d benefits. 473- 479. 4 76(ng.)
decision-makin g and. 47 3-475
environmenta l policy and. 570-57 1
foreign policy a nd. 531
here-and-now argument and. 487-48 8
interest groups and. 476-477
majorilarian politics and. 475-476.56 5- 566
Council of Economic Advisors (CEA). 383 .499
Council of State Governments. 62
Council on Foreign Relation s. 542
Co unties. 57. 59.62.69
Co urt of Mil ita ry Appea ls. 446. 449(tig.)
Co urts. See also Federal courts: Supreme Court
activism of. 584
changes in. 580
checks and ba lances and. 29
mandates (Illd . 67

politica l agenda and. 472
power 01'. 4 38
state. 59.448.449. 449( l1 g.). 450. 454
Courts of appea ls. 84 . 445. 446. 448. 535
jurisdiction of. 449(l1g.). 45 0-451
Cox Broni/castill!! Co rp. v. ColllI (19 75). 11 3.
11 7
Crack cocaine. 138- l39
Cmig v. Borell (1976) . 142
Crim e

civil rights and. 138-13 9. 169
due process and. Jl 3-121
med ia and. 299.30 ]
Criminal Ju stice Lega l Foundation. 272
Crisis. T/,e (magazi ne). 12 8. 129. 269

Index
Cronk ite. Wa lter. 30 7
CRS (Congressiona l Research Service). 347
C-S PA TV network. 308
Cuba. 12Q295. 532.540.54 7. 548
Soviet Uni on and . 53l. 534
Cuban Americans. 165 . 258

Cultura l connic!. im migration a nd. 100- 10 I
"Cu lture war." 86- 87
Cummin gs. Elijah. 341
CWlllll ill!1 v. Richlllolld Co ull ty Board oj Educotioll
(1899). 128
Cuomo. Mario. 233
Currency. 56.6 1
Cllrtiss- Wriollt Export Corp. " Ullireli Srates
( 19 36).538
Customs Service. 399.424
C7.echoslovakia.543

Dail!J Mirror (newspaper). 298
Dail!J Teleoraph (newspaper). 298
Dairy Divi sion

or Agricultural Marketin g

Serv ice. 482
Dai ry industry. 482. 483
Dama ge suits. 452-45 3
Darwinism. 268
Dasc hle. Tom. 248
Davis. Gray. I 65
Davis. John W.. 212
DDT (pesticide). 568
Dea n. Howard. 239. 24 3. 250.307
Int ernet ca mpa ign of. 209. 297
Dea th penalty. 458
Deaver. Michael K.. 284
Debate. presidentia l candidates. 242. 244. 302
Debs. Eugene V.. 22 0. 22l. 222
Dece ntra lization. 58 1
in Congress. 32 0. 322. 342- 343
Decision-makin g. 586. 588
cost-benefit an a lysis and. 473-475
mi litary policy clOd. 553- 555

Decla ration of In dependence (1776). 1 7. 18.
35- 36.83
on slave ry. 19
text of. A I- A 3
De Jacto seg regation. 132
Defense budget. 547- 553. See also Milita ry
spendin g
ror bases. 553

55 1- 552
for personnel. 550- 55 1
for readin ess. 553
for small ticket items. 552- 55 3
tota l spend ing. 547- 549
ror major item s.

wa r on terro ri sm and . 4 94

Defense Department. 422. 428. 532.537
See also M ilitary
constra ints on. 42 4
corruption in . 284
employees in . 42 1(fig.)
military policy and . 547. 554. 557
Defense of Marriage Act (1996). lSI
Defi ci!. See Budget defi cit
De Ga ulle. Charles. 534
De jill''' segregati on. 132
DeKa lb County. Georgia. 1 34
Delaware. 35. 37. 237(fn. )
Delegate model. 399
Delegate selection. 22 ).241
delega te allocation form ul as. 209- 2J 0
superdelegates. 2 11
,.v inn er- rcward systems. 212

Democracy. 6- 10. 76
Constitulion and . 25
direct. 6- 8. 59
distribution of power in. 8-10
foreign policy and . 6.53 1
human nature an d. 29- 30
inlraparty.2 10
pol itica l cultu re and. 77
represent ative. 6-8 . 27- 28
self- interest and. 10
terrori sm and. 7

DelllOcrac!J ill AlIlerica ('I'ocqu evi lle). 77
Democrati c ca ucus. 342. 343
Democra ti c Congressional Ca mpaign Commit-

tee. 336
Democratic aliona l Commill ee (DNC) . 209.
211-2 12.246
Democratic party. See IIlso Politi ca l pa rties:
Repu blica n party
Africa n America ns and. 222. 258 . 259
anti war move ment and. 22 1- 222
co nservative coalition in. 333
control or Congress. 370. 37 1. 518 . 52 3.
582
contro l of House. 328 . 33 0
fa ctiona lization of. 20 8
52 7 orga nizations a nd. 252
gridlock and. 37 1
identilkation with. 199 . I 99(fi g.)
Iowa ca ucus a nd. 237. 238
Jackso nia n. 202- 20 3. 204. 375
nominating conventions of. 203. 209-2 12.
21 7.222.224. 54 1
presidency and. 225- 22 6. 254- 255.
258(tab.). 259
redistricting a nd. 329
reform groups in. 2 1 5
Sout h a nd. 167.2 0 3.204
spli t in (1860). 205- 206
support for m ilitary by. 555
ta x reform and. 50 7
two-pa rty system and. 2 17- 220
un employment worries of. 496
unions a nd . 216 . 222. 258
voter turnout and. 190
women and. 160
Democratic-Republica ns. See JefTersonian
Republica ns
Democra tic Study Group. 332. 340
Demonstrations. 88. 192. See also Protests
civil rights movement. 135 . 136. 13 7
in terest groups a nd . 285- 28 6
against NA FTA. 502
public policy and. 190
Denver. Colorado. 298. 565
Departm cnts. See spedJic depnrllllellt s
Deregulation. 280.30 1- 302.488-489
Derthick. Martha . 488
Desegregation. See nlso BmlVlI v. Board oj
Edllralioll
busi ng and. 67. 133- 134.463
compliance with Civil Rights Act of 1964.
137.460
federal mand ates. 66. 6 7
"freedom of choice" plan. 132
integra tion contrasted. I 32-134
racia l qu otas in. 169 .4 5 1
of schools. 129. 13 l. 380.459.470.472
socia l science as rati onale for. 13 1- 132
Supreme Court rulin gs. 129. 13 1- 134
Detroit. Michiga n. 215- 2 I 0. 298

Devolution . 49. 50. 68-70
Dickersoll " Ull ired SWles (2 000).121
Dicki nson. John. 18
Dill on's rule. 57
Direct democracy. 6- 8. 59
Direct-mai l solicitations

ca mpa igni ng. 243- 244. 147. 257
fund -raisin g. 20 9. 21 5. 283
by in terest groups. 277- 278. 282
Direct primary electi ons. 204. 222
Dirksen. Everett. 1 37
Disabl ed (hand icapped) persons. 43 J . 514
rights or. 66-67. 147
Discha rge ca lendar (House) . 352
Discharge petition. 352 . 353
Discretionary authority. 4 1 5
Discrimination. 457
in employment. J 38. 145.148
on gender bias. 1 38. 14 1
intent to discrimin ate. 133
racial. 141;. 149
reve rse discrim ination. 145. ] 48.455

strict scruti ny of. 125
Disengagement. 544. 545
Di sruptive tactics. 285-28 6. See also Protests
Dissenting opin ion. 45 6
Distributional formulas. 65
District courts. 445. 446. 44 8
jurisdiction or. 449(l1g.). 450
District of Columbia. 7. 183.278 . 298
Diversity
affirmative acti on and. 144

federalis m and. 70. 72
religious. 85
Diversity cases. 448
Divided government. 3 70-372 . 433
Division Istandin g) vote. 3 55
"Dixiecrat" (States' Rights) part y. 22 0. 22 1.
223
DNC (Democratic National Committee). 209 .
2 11- 212.246
Doctrines
of dua l sovereignt y. 450
of nu lli fi cation. 56
of preemption. 55)
of "privileged speech." 238
of sovercig n immu nity. 4 52

of state sovereignly. 2 1. 58- 60.455
Dole. Bob. 187 . 233 . 237
Domesti c policy. See Pol icy
Domestic programs. 498.579
Double trackin g. 355
Douglas. Stephen A.. 20 5
Douglas. Will ia m 0 .. 46 J
Douglass. Frederick. 2 J 2
Draft. military. 549- 550
women excl uded from. 14 (). 141- 142
Draft-ca rd burni ng. 108. I I ()
Dre" Scott case (1857) . 442. 461. 46 3
"Drivi ng while blac k." 139
Dru g companies. 485
prescription dru g benefit. 522. 525. 526
Dru g Enforcemen t Administration. 424.5 37
Dru g laws. 484. 4 88
Dru g war nin g labels. 579

Dua l federa lism. 57
Dua l sovereignty doctrine. 450
Du Bois. W. E. 13 .. J 29.269
Du e process. 11 3- 12 1
confessions and sel f-incrimin ation. 11 7- 11 8
excl usiona ry ru le. 11 4-11 0. 11 8-119

17

[8

Index
good-lilith exception. LL9
la ndmark cases. 12 1
sea rch a nd seizure. 11 3-1 J 4. 116- 11 7
te rrorism and civil liberties. I 19- 12 1
Due proccss cla use. 102. 104. I 10
Dukakis. Michael. 225. 233. 234. 256.309
Dull cs. John Foster. 533
Dunlop. Jo hn. 387
Duplication. bu reaucra ti c. 430. 43]

,J

Elazar. Daniell ..
Elections. 43. l S I . 192. 230- 262.Sl'I'!llso
IIl1der Vo ters: Vo li ng
activist government and. 584
campaign and. See Campaigns

Ea rth Day. 563
Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconci liatio n
Act (200J ). 493
Economic interests. 3 7-39
Li(,()lIolllic l illerpre/!llioll oj lli e COIISlillilioll. All
(Bea rd ). 3X
Economic planning theory. 497-498
Economic po licy. 169. 49 1- 510
budge t an d. 492 . 494 . 494( fl g. ). 499 .
503-5 04
Congrea a nd.492.50 1- 502
economic theories. 497-499
Federa l Reserve Board. 500-50 I
majorit" ria n politics a nd. 494. 496. 497. 50 I
politics of prosperity an d. 494-496
spendin g and. 496. 497. 502- 50S
taxes a nd. 492. 493. 496-497.505.
50 7- S09
Economic Policy Institute. 273
Economic prosperity. 494-496
Economic protest parties. 220 . 221
Econom ic system (economy). See !llso Costs a nd
benefits

forecasting outcomes of. 256

Environmenta l impact sta tements (ELS). 564.

565- 566

ki nds of. 24 1
mu nicipa l. 2 19
part y affi liation and. 252.25-'
plura lity system . 217- 2J 8
preside ntial. See Preside ntial elect ions
primary. See Primary elect iOll s
prospective vDling. 2:; 5
reelecti on of inclimbents. 232
ret.rospec ti ve vDlin g. 255- 156

role of pa rties in. 254-255
state and mu nicipal. 213. 2 14
winner-take-al l. 2 11. 217. 2 18- 2 J9. 220.
376
w inni ng coa litions.

257- 259

Electoral college. 27.372.373.376-377
w inn er-take-a ll principle in. 2 18-2 19.

376
Electora te. ISO- I X7
ledera l control of. 18 1- 1X3
pa rt y ident ilkation. 199
voter turn out. See Voter turn out
Electro nic media. 296- 29 7. See 11/.10 Intern et:
Radio: Television
Electro nic rol l-ca ll voting. 356
El ementa ry and Secondary Educa tion I\ CI

government role in. 413. 442-443. 578
growt h of. 492- 493
growth of. an d tax dedu ctions. 50 8- 50 9
other nations compared. 81 - 82
pa rty rea lignment and. 206
politica l culture a nd. 77 . 79-80

(2001).524
Eleventh Amend ment ( 1795).58.445 . 46 1
Elites
busin ess. 9. 479

vo ling a nd. 252. 255- 256
Eco nom ists
burea ucra cy a nd. 423

theories of. 497-499
Education
See !llso Colleges a nd uni versities: Schools
bili ng ua l. 10l
desegregation of. See I3rowII \I. l3o!l rd oJ EdllcaliD', ; Dcsegregil ti on
fede ra l grants for. 60. 62. 65-66
li berali %i ng effect of. 136. 16 1. 162.267
pu blic opinion an d. 16 1- 162
sex discri minat ion in. 138
voting and. 18 8. 189 (flg. ). 19 1
Ed ucatio n a nd the Workforce Committee
(li ouse). 345
Education Department. 385.4 11
Ed ucat.ion prognlllls. 524

Eighteen-year-aids. voti ng by. IS 3. 46J
Eight h Amen dment (1 79)). 36. 102.45 7
Eisenhower. Dwight. 233. 259. 518. 538. 577
cabinet 01'. 384
cha racter of. 388
popu larity 01'. 392( l1g. )
presidency of. 369 . 375 . 38 0 . 39 1.400
school desegregation a nd. 38 0.470.472
veto power and, 395
EIS (Environ m enta l im pact statem ents) . 564,

565-566

bu siness regulation and. 48 4-48 5. 487

decid in g fac tors in . 253- 259
effects on policy. 259- 260 . 262

congressiunal . Se(~ Congressional elections

business regu latio n an d. 479

Economic theory. 497-499

Entrepreneurial politi cs. 47b( fi g.). 4 78-479
environmenta l policy and. 560-56 1. 564
Enumerated powers. 29
Environmen ta l i\ction. 274. 282
Environ men ta l Defen se Fu nd . 2 74. 276. 487.
568

issues a nd. 255-256
Earn ed I ncome Tax Credit. 516. 522

Entrcpre ncuriCi I fun ctio n of staffs. 34 6

Env iro nment al poli cy. 559- 574
acid rain. 566- 567

ag ricu ltural pesticides. 560- 561. 563.
568- 569. 572
auto emissions. 561. 564-566
client politics a nd. 56 3. 568- 569
context 01'. 561. 563
controversy over. 360

costs and benent s. 570- 571
endange red species. 562. 563. 564. 569
entrepreneurial politics a nd. 560- 56 1. 564
globa l wa rmin g. 5GO. 16 1. 563- 564
interest group politics a nd. 56 1 (fn .) . 56 3.
566- 568
IllCljori ta ria n politics a nd, 363. 564-566
m ajor laws. 563. 564. 565- 566
resu lts of. 572
Superfund program. 478 . 4 79.570.572

unce rt ainties in. 560. 56 3. 566. 569- 571
Envi ronmen tal prot.ection

mandates. 66. 67
movemcnt 1'01'.27 3.274
Envi ronmental Protection Agency (EPA ). 27 1.
4 11 .422 . 427 . 452.479.563.568
auto em ission s an d. 564. 565
command-a nd-co ntrol strat egy Clnd.

interest grou p bias a nd. 278

570- 571
laws uits and . 485. 487.565
Reagan and. 485. 570
Envi ron ment a nd Pub lic Works Comm ittee
(Senate). 344

optimism of. 1960s. 5112

EPA. See Environme ntal Proteclion Agency

globa l war ming controversy and . 563

Episcopa l ch urch. 87

pluralist view or. 9- 10

polit ical. See Politica l eliles
EI Salvador. 534. 544. 547
Employment
during

and after government

Equa l Employment Opportunities Commission .

ser vice.

284-28 5
condi tions of aid and. 67
disabled and. 147
di scrimin ation in . 59 . 1 3H. 145. 14X

tedera l empl oyees. 416( l1 g.)
h ir ing quota s a nd , 79

of illegal a lien s. 146
sexual hara ssment and. 14 2

un empl oy ment. 69. 47 1. 474. ,195. 496.
499.516.5 17
Employment and Training Admi nistration. 4 11
Enda ngered spec ies. 562. 563. 569
Enda ngered Species Act ( 19 73). 56 3.564
Energy and Com merce Com mitlee (il nusc).
345
Energy and Natura l Resources Committee (Senate) . 344
Energy Depa rtment. 428 . 486
"/lgelv. Vitale( 1962). 11 4
England . SI'I' Great Bri ta in (England)
Enh anced rescissio n authority, 45. 395
Entit lemen t grant s, 69- 70
Entitlemen t program s. 3':;9

Entitlemen ts. 503

142
Eq ua lity. ] 0. '; 86- 58 8
Constitu tion a nd. 39-40
income. 81 - 82. 82(tab.)
po litical cult ure and. 77
ra ce relati ons a nd. 7X

Eq ua lity of opportunit y. 79 .1 45- 149
Eq ua lity 01' resu lts. 79. 144. l45
Eq ua l ju sti ce prinCipl e. 457
Eq ual Pay Act. 358
Equa l protectio n of law. 102. 127- 128. 1 3 1.
146.150
Equal Rights Amendment (ERA ). 274. 275
Eq ual ti me rule. 302
Erikson. Erik. 85- 86
ErZllo:llik 1'. jocksolivilll' ( 19 7 5). 11 3. 11 7
Escobedo case. 1 I S
Espionage and Sedi tion Acts ( 1917- 191 8) .
100. 10 3
Establishment clause. I Ol. 11 0. 1Jl- J ]3
Ethic of self-reliance. 79
Eth ics a nd Publ ic Policy Center. 273
Ethi cs Committce (Senate). 344
Ethics in Govern men t Act ( 1978). 284.285
Ethi cs rules in Congress. 360
Ethnic minorilies. 164- 167. See (llso Mi norities:
Race: sJJ('('iJk ethl1 ic l1Iil/ority

Index
Europe. 23 1. 368.495
See also specific colllltry
a lliances with . 53 1
burea ucracy in . 41 1. 584
class cl eav age in. 163
co aliti ons in . 2 ] 9- 220

jud ic ial rev iew in, 462

parl ia mentary systems in. 23 1. 3bS
poli tica l associa tion in. 269
poli tica l parti cipation in . 192. 192(tab.)
political pa rt ies in . 199- 200
sense of erlicacy in . 90
voter turn out in. 178
welfare programs in. 51 7
European Common M arket. 534

Europea n Cou rt of Huma n Rights. 46 2
Evangelical Christia ns. 86. 159. 160(tab.)
!ivasoll " Board of Edllrolioll (194 7). 11 4
Exclusion ary ru le. 114- 1J 6. 11 8-] 19
Exclusive committees (I louse) . 34 5
Ex ecutive agencies . 38fi
Ex ecuti ve ag reem ent s. 5 3 2. 534
Exec utive bra nch , 2 0. 584 . S'('e (l Isa Presiden cy
confl icts of interest a nd. 285

economic policy and. 499
foreign policy and. 538
reorga ni zatio n of. 39 9- 4 00
velo power of. 25
Execu tive Ca lenda r (Senate) . 352
Execut ive Orlice of the President. 383- 384
Execut ive privilege. 39 6
Ex it polls. 157
Ii.\' post faclO laws. 35. 102
Extern a l effi cacy. 90
Factiona l pa rt ies. 20 3-204. 220- 22 1. 223
Fa clions. 30. 32-33 .85
Madison on. 32. 51. 265
within polilica l pa rties. 20 1- 20 2. 2 I 5
Fa ir ness Doc trin e. 30 2
Fa ir-s ha re form u las. 6 J

Fa ith-based groups. 5 1 5- 51 6. See 11150 Religion
Faith-based prog ra ms. 94
Families
politi ca l socia li>.al ion and. 85-86. l 58- 159
si ngle-pa rent. 5 13. 522
welfare and. 16 7. 5 13
Family and Medica l Care Leave Act. 358
Fa mily Assistan ce Plan or 1969 . J6 7
Jla rber. My ron. 30 ]
Farmers. 2 58- 25 9. 427. 4 70. See 11150 IIl1der
Agriculture
an li trust law a nd. 480 . 48 1
dai ry industry. 482 . 483
interest gro ups a nd. 266. 26 7. 2 70. 278
pesticides and. 560- 56 1. 56 3. 568- 569
protest s by. 179
sli ga r im por t quotas and. 4 82--483

tobacco price suppo rts a nd. 478
Fa rmers' Union. 266. 267. 280
1'131 (Federal Burea u of [nvestigati on). ) 36.
4 1] .4 J ~424.428 . 537

FCC. See Federal Communications Commission
FDA (Food and Dru g Administration). 282 .
184.412 .485
FEA (Federa l Energy Administra tion). 28 0
Featu re news stories. 305
Pedera l agencies. See 11150 specific agellcy
"a ctiv ist" agencies. 422
culture or. 4 23-424
environm ent al impact studies cmd. 564

foreign polic)'. 538
growt h or. 4 13
heads or. subordin ates a nd. 4 22-423
po litica l ideologies of. 411
president and. 38 6. 399 . 4 17
recrui tm ent and retention , 4 1 5

19

regula tory age ncies. 184 . 4 1 5. 483-484
states a nd. 4 1 5
Federal aid. See II lso Gran ts-in-aid
discrimina tion a nd. 1 38
to states. 582
Federa l bud get. 180. 383- 384. 39 8. 4 94(i1 g.)
See II /SO Budgel dei1cits
ba lancing of. 262. 338
Cli nton a nd. 37 1
Congress and . 379. 397. 503-504
defense. See Defense budget
proposed bala nce budget a mendment.
28(fn.). 43 . 4 5. 50 6
surplu s. 61
Federal burea u cracy,

5,'(!('

Burea ucracy

Federa l Bureau of Invesli ga lion (FBI). 136.
4 11.41 7. 414 . 4 2S . 537
Federa l Communications Co mm ission (FCC) .
243 . 28Q299. 3UI. 427. 4 'Q488
licensing by. 29 3
mergers a nd . 483-484
Federa l Constitutiona l Court (Germ a ny) . 4 62
Federa l courts. 48 5.579 . See IIlso Sup reme
Courl
ac tivism of. See Judicia l acti vi sm
campa ign fi na nce suit in . 25 1

civil rights movement in. 127- 134
c1,lss-action suits in. 45 3--454
on co nfi dentiali ty of sources. 30 I
Congress a nd. 460. 46 ) -46 3
development or. 43 9- 445
fee shirt in g. 452 . 4 54
gellin g to. 4 5 1-454
judicial rev iew. 28 . 438-43 9
jurisdi ction of. 448- 4 5.1. 449(fi g.)
lawsuits in. 4 5 1-45 4
legislation a nd. 460
mandates by. 66- 67
map of. 445
Mllrbury v. Mlldisoll a nd. 440-44 1
nation-state relati onship a nd . 44 1-442
policy-mak ing or. 439
power or. 4 56-4 57. 4 59
public interest lobbies a nd. 443
pub lic opin ion an d. 444. 46 3-464
selecting judges for. 446- 4 48. 447(tab.)
sta ndin g a nd . 4 52-453.454
structure or. 44 6-448
Federa l Deposit Insurance Corporation . 42 4
Federa l Emergency Ma nagement Agency. 39 9
Federa l Energy Administration (FEA). 28 0
Feden-II gover n ment. See a/so Co ngress; Govern ment: House of Representati ves: Judiciary: Presidency: President : Senate:
Sup reme Court
acti vist govern ment. 582. 584. 588
Bush's reorga nization or. 399
constrai nts on. 406
employ ment by. 4 16(ng.)
enviro nl11cnlal laws an d, 5 6]

inlluence of consti tutional strllct ll re on. 58 5
inll llence of ideas on. 58 5- 588
New System. 5 n. 580- 58 2
Old System. 578. 579- 580
permissible scope of. 588

power to regulate commerce. 442. 44 3
relaxi ng restraint s on. 578- 579
restrai nts 0 11 gro wth of. 577- 578
su premacy or. 44 1-442
wa r powers of. 532 . 536-537. 53 9. ROO
wclfCl rc progra ms or. See Socil-'l l welfare
Pedera l gran t.s. 27 1, See also Gra n t.s-in-aid

for campaigns. 233 . 244-2 46. 25 0 . 288
to faith-based organi >.ations. 5 1 5- 5 16
for interest groups. 276-277
Federa l highway program. 63
Federa l I-lousi ng Finan ce Boa rd. 4 24
Federal income taxes. 3.287.460
19 13-20 02.5 0 8(fi g.)
cuts in. 499
Earn ed Income Tax Credit. 51 6. 522
exemption from. 287
gran tS-in-a id a nd. 6 1
loopholes in. 50 5. 50 7- 50H
Sixteenth Amendment and . 4 14. 461. 507
Supreme COll rt on. 50 7. 577
wartime taxes. 4 14

Federa lism. 30. 39 . 4 8- 73
ad versar ia l politics in. 56 1

Co ngress a nd. 53.66- 67. 70. 72
co ntroversy surrounding, 50- 52

devolution a nd . 4 9. 50 . fi S- 70
dual federa lism. 57- 58
rederal-state relations. 60-68
goa ls of Founders a nd . 5 I . 52- 54. 85
governmental structure under. 50- 52

52- 53
mand ates ' md . 67- 68
mean ing of. 54- 60
null ifi cation an d. 56
politica l aclivity un der. 52. 6 1- 62
as inn ova ti on .

poli ti ca l party organiza tion an d, 2 00

representa ti ve democracy and. 28- 29
state sovereignty a nd. 58-60
Supreme Court on . 54- 56. 58
termi nology of. 5 1
welfare policy and . 5 I ,
fl'dl' mlist papers. 22. 25 . 32- 33
~ 1 0 .32 . 33 . 34. 51. 153 . 265.
A2 1-A2 5
No. 28. 53
No. 39. 5 1
No. 45.54
No. 46 .5 3
No. 51. 1. 32 . 33 . 34. 3 15.467.5 75.
A2 6- A29
No. 78. 440
Federa list pa rty. 85 . 201 - 202. 294. 440. 463
Federal AI/ariUmc COl1lmission v. Soull! Caroli1la

Ports AlI lllOrity (2 00 2).58
Federa I-q uestion cases. 448
Federa l quota system . See Quo tas
Federal regime. 5 1

Federa l Regul ation or Lobbyin g Act ( J 946) .
286- 287
Federal regulations. See Govern ment regulation
Federal Reserve Boa rd. 42 4 . 500-5 0 I
Federal securi ties. 500
Federal spendin g. 398 . 4 16(fi g. ). 584
See II lso Bud get defi cits: Federa l bu dget
cuts in . under Reaga n. 498-499. 504
economic policy a nd. 4 96. 49 7.50 2-50 3
grants-in-aid. S(J(' Grants-in-aid

on mili tary. See Mi lita ry spending
nationa l debt a nd. 504( fi g.)
pay-as-you-go approach. 505

19

110

Index
presidentia l a ttempts to limit. 3 9 4.
396- 397. 398
projected. 505 (flg .)
red tape and. 43 I
redu ctions in. 504-505
fo r soc ial welrare. 523
taxa tion and. 496-497
Federal-state relations. 60-68. See also
Gran ls-in-aid
Federa I syste m. 5 J
Federal Trade Commission Ac t ( 19 14).48 0
Federa l Trade Commission (FTC). 284. 422.
423
Federation or Business and Proressiona l
Women. 274
Fcc shiftin g. 452. 454
Feingold. Russell. 109.25 2
Felllillille Mystiqlle. Till' (Frieda n ). 140
Fe minist moveme nt. 106. 274- 275
Fe rraro. Gera ld in e. 240
Firteen th Amendme nt (1870) . 18 J. 443 . 46 1
Firth Amendme nt (1 79 1). 36. 4 1. 102 . ] 14
Filibuster. 235. 324. 354- 355 .4 38 .5 36
Fin ance Commi ttee (Senate). 344. 34 5. 501
Financial disclosure. 285
Pinancial Services Commi ltee (!l ouse), 345

Firings "rul es. " 419. 420
First Amendmen t ( 179 1). 36. 102- J 1 3. 146.
286
See !llso Freedom or ex pression
rreedom or religion. ]01. 102. 110- 11 3.
453
inclusive defin ition or "person." 108- 1 10
intcrpreLin g and applyi ng. ] 02- 105

media and. 300. 313 . See also Free press
First Great Awa kenin g. 83
Firstl-l oover Commission (1947- 1949). 432
Fisca l policy. SO I. See also Economic po licy
Fiscal year (rY ). 503
"Fitness" for ornce. 37 5
527 orga nizat ions. 252
Flag-b urnin g. 108
"Floaters" (repeat vo ters). 185
Floor debate (House). 353- 354
Floor debate (Senate). 3 5ct- 3 55
Florida. I] 3. 183(tab.). 186.248.25 1. 376.
464
Flowers. Gcnnifer. 310. 3 I I
Foley. To m. 337
Foley v. COllllelie (J 9n ). 146
rood a nd Drug Ad ministra tion (FDA ). 282.
284.422.485
Food Stamps. 5 13. 5 16. 516(flg.). 522
Ford. Gerald. 134. 240. 309
Angola and. 534. 536
on big governme nt. 470
character of. 388-389
deregulation and. 488 . 489
election or 1976 a nd. 224. 242. 495
pardon of I ixo n by. 404
popularity of. 392. 393(f1g.)
presidency of. 386. 387. 394.475.533.
538
vice presidcncy of. 233. 40 3
Ford Fo undation. 276
Foreign a ffairs. history of. 11- J 2
Forei!J1I AJJi/irs (magazine). 542
Foreign competition. 501-5 02. 542
Foreign policy. 529-54 5
client politics a nd. 531
democracy a nd. 6.5 3 1

el ites a nd. 541 - 545
kinds of. 5 3 1- 532
landmark cases. 538

ma chi nery of. 537- 539
majoritarian politics and. 53 1. 532
under parliamen tary system. 534

pattern s or leadership in. 5 33
preside ntia l power in. 531. 532- 537
publ ic opi nion and. 539-5 42
represen tati onal vo tin g on. 33 1

State Department and . 532. 537. 538 . 542 .
557
support for president in. 540- 54 1
terrorism a nd. 530. 5 39
useof military rorce. 536- 537 . 539.
545- 547
Foreign policy elites. 542- 545
Forei{j/l Policy (magazine). 542
Foreign Re lations Com millee (Sena te) . 344.
345. 536. 542
Foreign service jobs. 42 2
Forest Se rvice. 42 8 . 569
Formal authority. power and. 5
Foundation grants. 276
Fou nders. See Framers of Const itution
Fou rteenth Ame ndment ( 18 68 ). 148.46 1
Bi ll of Ri ghts ex tended to states. 35 . 102 .
III
ci ti zenship and. 145
desegregation a nd . 127- 128 . 131.132
due process clause of. 102. I Oct. ] to
equal protecti on of law. 102. 127- 128.
13 1. 146 . 150
illega l a lie ns a nd . 146
slale Im·v and. 439. 443
wo men's ri ghts and. l40

Fourth Amendment (1791) . 36.4 1. I 14
Fourth World. 545
Fox News telev ision . 299. 30 3
Framers of Constitution (Founders). 24- 25.
155
Bill of Ri ghts and. 34.98
compromise w ith slavery. 36-3 7
concern s a bout presiden cy. 372- 3 7 3
Congress and. 32 1
goals of. redera lism and. 30. 5 I. 52- 54
judiciary and. 438-439
moti ves of. 29-3 0 . 37- Hl
politica l pa rties and. 20 1- 20 2
ratifi ca tion and. 3 1
011 representati ve dcmocracy. S. 27-28
France. 23 . 82(tab. ). 100 . 198. 374
burea ucracy in. 4 1 I. 584
Constitutional Coun cil. 438. 462
interest gro ups in. 266
med ia in. 293
multiparty system 01'. 377
patriotism in. 8 1. 8 1(tab. )
pl ura lity system in. 217- 2 18
power of prim e minister in. 534
re ligion in. X3( tab.). 84(ta b.)
Revolutio n in (1789) . 17. 100. 169 . 374
ta xation in. 50 5
unitary govcrnm ent of. 50. 5 'I

wor ki ng class in. 163
Frankfurter. Fel ix. 457
Fra n king privi lege. 253. 3 19. 358
Frank li n. Be nja min. 24. 26
Fraterna l Order of the Police. 99
Free Con gress Foundation. 273

Freedom. eq uality and. 586- 587

"Freedom-of-choice" desegrega tion plan. 1 32.
134
"Freedom of contract." 439
Freedom of expression. 99.586
rree press and. 105. 109. 11 3. I 17.
292- 293
inclusive del1 niti on of "person ." I 0 8-J J 0
libel a nd. 10 5. 293
national sec urity and. 1.0 2- 10 5
obscen ity an d. 105- 10 7
sy mbo lic spcech. 108
test in g restri ctions on. 10 7
Freedom of Info rmation Act (1966) . 293 . 424.
586
Freedom or religion. 102. JJO- 11 3. 11 4
Freedom rides. J 3 5
Free-exercise clause. 1] 0- 111
"Free love " primary. 24 1
Free market. m onetari sm and. 497
Free press. 105. 11 3. 11 7. 292- 293
landmark cases. 109
"Free-rider" prob lem. 4 75
Free-Soil party. 22 1
Free speech. 109. 25 I . See also Freedom of
expression

Free trade. 502
Fre nc h Revolution ( I n9). 17. 100. 1 69 . 374
Pre neau. Philip. 294
Fres hmen mem bers of Cong ress. 326-327,
326(fl g.)
Friedan. Betty. 140
Friedman. Milton. 49 7. 499
Frist. Bi ll. 3 18
FTC (Federal Trade Commission ). 284. 422. 423
Fu lbright. J. Wi lli am. 536
Ful to n. Missouri. 543
Ful ton. Robert. 442
Fundam entali st reli gious groups. 206, 268
Funding. Set' a/so Ca mpaign IIn ancing
abortion-funding policies . 7 1
formu las ror. 6 1
growth of PACs a nd. 282- 284 . 283(tab.)
ror interest groups, 276- 278
Ga in es. Lloyd. 129
Gal braith. John Kenneth . ct98. 499
Ga llup poll. 303. 39 1. 392-3 9 3( l1g. )
GAO (General Acco untin g Oflke) . 347
Gard ner. john . 277
Garfield. james A .. 4 0J . 402 . 4 17
Garne r. john Na nce. 40 I
Gar rity. W. Arthur. 133
Gasoli ne tax. 566. 570
Gatekeeper runct ion of media. 299
Gay (same-sex) ma rriage. 5. 150- 15 1.
159(flg. ). 16 1. 286. See "Iso Homosexual
(gay) ri ghts
GazeUe of tlil' Ullited S/(/tes. 294
GDP (Gross domestic product). 492. 493 (l1 g. ).
547
Gender discrim ina tion. 138.142. See "Iso
\l\/omen 's ri ghts

Gender gap. in po liti ca l attitudes. 160- 16 1.
16 1(tab.)
Genera l Acco unting Office (GAO). 34 7
General-ac t charter. 57

Genera l cicci ion s. 24 1
Genera l Motors. 268. 271. 484
Genera l revenue sharing (GRS) . 63- 64
General Services Ad minislralion. 4 32
Gen ocide. 545

Index
Gcog raphical rcgion. J 67

George III. King of England. 19
Georgia. 27( rn.). 35. 113. 134. 149. I 83(tab. ).
203.2 17. 442
Gephardt. Richard. 233
Gerber. Alan S.. 17X
Germany. ~2(lab.). 83(t"b.). 84( lab. ). 90. 269.
43S.557
judici al rcvicvv in. 462
N azis in. 545

patriotism in . 81. 8 1(tab. )
socia l security in. 5 14
World War " and. 534. 539
Gerry. Elbridge. 28.35.38.39.234
Gerryma nderin g. 234. 235. 236
Gettysburg Address (Lincoln ). 155
Gideon. Cla rence Ea rl. 450. 451
Gideol/ v. Wail/wright ( 1964). 121
Gi ngrich. ewt. 323. 333. 337- 338. 342
Gi nsburg. Ruth Bader. 454(tab.). 456
Gitlow. Benjami n. 104
Gittow v. New York (1925).102. 103.104
Giu liani. Hudy. 11
Glenn. joh n. 233
Global warmi ng. 560. 56 1. 563-564
Gold plating. 552
Goldwater. Barry. 169.224.225. 226.242.523
Goldwater-Nichols Act (1986). 554
Gompers. Sam uel. 578
"Good behavior." 403. 403( rn .) . 446
Goode. Virgil H.. II'.. 218
Good-I']ith exception. 119
Gore. AI. 84. 22 5.240. 309
Florid a vo te-count con trovcrsy and . 148.

251.376
vice presidency 01'.233.40 1.509.572
Governmen t. 3- 15. SeNI/so Federal
govcrnm ent
achievcmcnts of. 4
activisl. 582. 5t:)4. 588
change in vision or. 20- 2 1

constraints on journalists. 3 I I. 3 I 3
creation of' in tcrest groups and. 267
democrati c. See Democracy

divided government. 370- 372.433
economic role 01'.497. See a/so Economic
policy
expansion or. 11.470
goals or. 3- 4
hum an nature and. 29-30
importance of. 4
legitimacy 01'. 588
med ia and. 292. 309
mistrust 01'. See Mistrust or government
po litica l change and. 11-12
politica l participation and. 1 79- 180
polit ical power and. 4-6
reg ula tion by. SlJf Governm ent rcgulation
restra ints on journali sts by. 3 1 I. 3 13
un ined govcr nmen t. 370

Governmenta l Mfairs Committee (Senate). 344
Govern mentemplo)'ee unions. 275 . 276(tab.)
Government Perrormance and Results Act
(199 3).432
Govern ment Prin ling Omce. 295
Governm ent program s. disabled an d. 147
Governmcnt HcI'orm Com mittee (I lollse). 345
Governm cnt rcgulation. 4 16(li g.)

of business. 479-485
of com merce. 53- 54.442.443
deregulation of broadcast media. 30 1- 302

of eco nomy. 4 13
environmenta l protecti on. 564. 568 (l1g.)
of interest groups. 286- 287
regulatory age ncies. 284. 460

Greell v. COl lllly Sclloo/ Hoa rd oj New Kellt CO IIIII.y

(1968). 132 .134
Greer I'. Spock ( 1976).113. 11 7

Govcrn mcn t workers. unionization or. 176

Grenada. 533. 534. 544. 547
Grid lock. 40.37 1- 372

Govern ors. 43. 63

Gris\Vo/dv.CoIIII('clicllt( 1965).143

rcdcnll isl11 and. () I . 62

presidency and. 372
GP HA (Governm ent Pcrformance and Hcsults

Act. 199 3). 432
Grace. I. Peter. 43 I
Grace Commission. 431

Gralla",

\I,

Hic/wrdsoll ( 197 1). 146

Gramm. Phil. 50 4

Gra mm-Rud man Act ( 1974).504- 505
Grillld Army or th e Republic. 267
Grandl'ather clau se. -18 1

Gra nd jury information. 120
Gra nd Rapids. Mi chi ga n . 66
Gra nge. 266 . 267. 480. 481
Gra nt. Ulysses S.. 378
Gra nts-in -a id. 60-66 .41 5. See also Federal
grants

block gra nts. 49. 50. 63-64. 65. 69
categorica l gra nts. 63-65. 66. 68
condition s of a id and. 66. 67-68
distribu tiona l formula s. 65
ent.itlements and. 69- 70
federal-state relations and. 60-62
in lcrgovernmenlallobby and. 62
intersta te ri va lry. 05- 66

mandates. 66- 67

390
Grassroots lobbying. 28 1- 282. 287
Gral z II. Bol/il/wr (2003). 149
Gravel. Mike. 231>
Great Brita in (Englan d). 49 . H2( tab.). 90.374
civic duty in. 80
co lonial views of. 17- 18.24
lega l lradilion 01'. 103. I 14
libcl law in. 10 5.293
national ncws pa pcrs in. 298
Orncia l Secrets Act. 293. 309

Grassroots. parLisan.

parl iament.ary system in . 28. 42. 23 J.

259- 2 6U 3 19. 36 9. 37 1.41U43S. 514.
584
political autho rit), in . 265

Gross domestic product (G DP). 492. 49 3(lIg.).
547
GRS (Genera l revenu e sharing). 63-64
Grumman Aircra ft . 553
Gmt/er \I, Hollillger (2003). 149
Guantanamo prison. 120
Gllardiall (newspaper). 298
Gun control. 274. 282. 33 1.445. 47X
I/abeas corplls. writ of. 35. 102.462
Haddon. Willi am. jr.. 281. 485
Hagen. Mic hael Gray. 79
Haig. Alexander. 385-386
Haiti. 547. 555. 557
Haldeman. I-I. R.. 382
Hamilton. Alexa nde r. 6. 18. 26. 372. 384
on federa li sm. 54 . 85

Pedem/ist papers. 32. 53.4.40
Gazette oj tfle Ulliled States. 294

jefferson and. 20 I
mtiflcation of Constitution a nd. 35
as secretary of Treasury. 369. 374, 37 5.
386
views on governm cnt, 22
Il am mond. Susa n Webb. 340. 34 1
HIIII/pioll V. MOIl' SIIII WOllg ( 1976). 146
Ilancock. John. 2 I. 22
Handgun Conlrol. In c.. 282
Handicapped Children's Protection Act ( 1986).
66
Handicapped (di sa bled) persons. 43 I . 5 14
rights or. 66- 67. 147
Ilannity. Scan. 303
I larding. War ren G.. 104. 2 14.243
Ha re Kris hn as. J J 0
Harkin. Tom. 233
Harlan. john (elder). 461
Harl an. john (youn ger). 46 1
i-Imper's (ma gazin e) . 295
H arrison. Benj amin. 243

poll ution controls in. 56 1
prime minister in . 308. 309. 368-370
religion in. S3(tab.). 84(tab.)
slavery and. 36
treat)' with (1783) . 21
U.S. a llian ce with . 5 34. 545. 557
welfa re programs in. 514-5 15
worki ng class in. 163
Great Co mpromise. 26- 27

Harrison . Wi lli am Henry. 378. 388 .401
Hart. Gary. 300. 310
Harvard Law Revie\V. 455
Haste rt. Den nis. 323. 331
Hasti ngs. Alice. 46 1
Hatch Act(1939). 214
Hate crimes. 105
Hawa ii. 272
Hayes. Rutherford B.. 212. 378
Hazardous (toxic) wastes. 561. 564
Superfu nd and. 478. 479. 570. 572

Grca t l)epression. 470.578. See (liso New Dea l

Heal th. Education. Labor and Pensions COIll-

politica l orga niza ti ons in . 269

election or 1932 and. 206.517
social wel fare and . 5 16- 5 17. 523
transition to New System and. 58 1
un ion movemenl and. 275

"G reat Mention er. The." 233
"G reat Society" legislation. 472. 582
Greece. 536
Greek po/is (C ity-sla te). (,
Green. Dona ld I~. 178
Greenback party. 206. 22 1
Greenhouse effect. 560. 56 1. 563-564
Green party. 22 I . 27 1
Greenspan. Alan. 50 I

millee (Senate). 344
Hea lth a nd Ilu man Services (III IS) Department. 384.4 1]. 5 16
Hea lth ca re. See II/SO Medi ca id : Medicare
federal grants for. 62
progra ms for. 5 18. 581
spending for. 52 1(tab.)
I lcal lh Ca re Pin anci ng Admin istrati on. 4 1 .1
I lcal th maint.enan cc organ iza ti ons (1-I MOs) .

52 1- 522
Hearst. William Randolph . 295
Heclo. Ilu gh. 427
Heinz. john. III. 297

III

112

Index
lI elms. Jesse. 536
Ilenry. Pat rick . L8. 24. 35
I lcrc-and-now argumen t. 487-488
Ilcrilagc Foundation. 273

1111 5 (Ileal th a nd I-Ium an Services) Depa rtment. 384.4 1 I. 5 16
l li alea h. Florid a . 110
Ilighway sa fety. 474. 484
Ilili. An ita. 448
Ilispa nics (La ti nos) . 16 1.459
in Cong ress. 325. 325(lab.). 326
cuit ura l conil icts and. J 00. 10 1
in judiciary. 447( Og.)
political participat ion or. 192. 193. 19 HOg.)
publ ic opin ion and. 165- 167. 100(fig. )
voti ng of. 191. 258
Hitler. Adolph. 531. 543
HMOs (hea lth maintenance orga ni2ations).
52 1- 522
Holle rit h. Ilerma n. 413
lI olmes. Oliver Wendell. 103. 104.447
Homeland security. 70. 399
Homela nd Secu rity. Departme nt of (DH S). 49 .
6 1. 359-360.39 9 .4 14
Homeless. sy mpathy for. 477 . 478
Home-ru le charter. 57

Hu ll. Cordell. 533
Hum an nature. dcm ocracy a nd. 19- 30. 84
Hum an ri gh ts wo rld vic\,\/. 544-545

Hum phrey. Il ubert. 2 17. 22 1. 224. 242. 40 I.
5 .1 9
Ilun gary.5 4 3
Il un!. Jam es 13 .. 2 10
Ilu nt Commission. 2 I 0
Ilussein. Sad da m. 172. 248. 53 I . 544. 54X
Ilyde. Il enry. 14 3. 342.403
Il yde Ame ndm ent ( 1976). 143
IBM (Interna ti ona l Busi ness Mac h ines). 41; I
ICC (In terstate Comm erce Commission). 4 1 3.
443 . 488
Ida ho. 141
Ideas. 474. 489.585- 588
Ideo logica l interest groups. 27 1. 283
Ideo logica l pa rt ies. 2 I 5. 220. 22 I
Ideologica l purity. 447-448
Ideological sellCidentilk ation surveys. l68(Jig.)
Ideology. See Po litica l ideology(ies)
"I Have a Dream" speech (Kin g). 130
Ill egal a lie ns. ri gh ts 01'. 140
Illi nois. 219
Ill inois Farm Bureau . 270

Homosex ua l (gay) ri gh ts. 86. 95(Og.). 10 1.
149- 151
AIDS and . 174
gay marriage. 5. 150- 15J. J 59(Og.). 16 1.
286
la ndma rk cases. ] 50
military serv ice. 551. 552
"Iloneymoon" of president. 394

Imm igrati on . 78

I ionoraria. ban

146. 399
Imm igration I~ cl o rm a nd Con trol Ac t ( 1986).
14 6

011.

360.362

Il oover. Ilc rbert. 307. 390. 399.432
I iouse ca lendars. 352

House of Comm ons (Great Britai n ). 3 19 . 334
Iiouse of Reprcsen lat ives. 34. 37. 582. See also
Congress: Senal e: Spea ker of Ihe House
ca mpaign costs for. 244-246. 245(l1g.)
campaign for. 234- 235
ch angi ng organization of. 322- 323. 343
cOlllm ittees of. See specific COHfl1li/tIJ(JS

I 84(1-I996. lO J (Ji g.)
cu ltura l conn ict a nd. 100- 10 I
curbs on lega l. 173
illega l a liens. 146
polit ica l mac h ine a nd. 2 I 3
lerrorist law a nd . 120. 12 1
Immigrati on a nd Natu ra liza lion Ser vice (INS).

I mm inent da nger. 10 7

Impeac h men t. 40 3-404. 4 6 1
of Cli nton. 87 . 33 1. 333 . 338. 368.403
Imperiali sm. burea ucratic. 430. 43 1
"Imperia l presidency." 30S. 534
Implied powers. 378
Import quotas. 482-41; 3

Con serva ti ve a ll ia nce in . 504
Constitution an d. 27. 28

Import ta x. See Ta rirrs

Democ ra tic control of. 207. 260
devol ution a nd. 69. 70
"Dirty Dozen " in. 282
election to. See Con gressiona l eleclions
noor deba te of bills in. 353
impeachment a nd . 87 . 403
legislative process a nd. 352
media coverage or. 308
pa rty structure in . 335-337
polariza tion in. 333
presiden ti al elections a nd. 220. 372. 373.
376.377
qua lil1cations and privileges or. 238. 3 19
Repu blican control of. 232 . 328-330. 338.
342.344
reve nue bi lls and. 35]

Incentives to join organiza tions. 270- 272

stan ding commi ttees of. 345

terms or. 42
vo tin g fo r. 18 1
I iousi ng. discrimi nation in. 138

Ii ousi ng a nd Urba n Developmen l (I-IUD). 64.
384- 385.4 11. 427.5 16
lI ouston. Texas. 478
IIUD. See I-lousi ng and Urba n Developme nt
Ilug hes. Charles Evans. 46]

Impoun dmen l of fu nds. 396- 397
Income

electio n results a nd . 256
equity. 8 1-8 2. 82( lab.)
level. taxat ion and. 507 . 508(l1g.)
redistri bu ti on. 5 14
security. federa l gra nts for. 62
stra tegy. 526
Income tax. See Federal income ta xes
In corporation . 10 2
la ndm ark cases. 103

In cumben cy. 282
ca mpa ign fu nds for. 246
growth of. 326- 318. 326(tab.). 327(tab.). 319
newspaper endorscment of. 306

PAC fu ndin g an d. 283
reelection of. 232. 234- 235. 236. 256.
262. 328( tab.)
retrospcc tive vo tin g a nd. 151- 156
spe ndin g by. 253. 253(ta b.)
In dependence Ha ll (Phi ladelphi a). 26
Independent agencies. 3X6
Independent Cou nsel. 4 0 4
Independen t ex pen ditures. 250
Independents. 1 5S- 1 59. 207

lndependent voters. 254- 255
India. 438
In diana. 100. 2 1 3. 2 17
"In dia na" ba llol. 207
In dian Afra irs Comm ittee (Sena te). 344
Individu a l con lribu ti ons. 250
Indi vidua l erfor!. 23 1
In div idu a l res ponsibi lity. 77 . 79
member of Co ngress and . 232
Indu strial po licy. 498
Industry
See a/so Busi ness: specific ilJ(llist r!J
Odcnsc Depcl rtmcnt and. 284
cnvi ronmenta ll aws a nd . 567. 57 ]

interest gro u ps a nd. 267. 278. 2S 0
m il itary-industria l complex . 547 . 552
opposi tion to free trade by. 502
sta te law a nd. 443

lneq uali ty. views 01'. 39. See also Equa lity
Inlla tion. 495. 496 . 499
wage an d price con trols and. 4 9 8
III Ja rilla pal/peris. 45 I
fn form ati on. See Politica l inform ati on
In iti ative. legisla tion by. 13 . 59. 149. 204
rnsider news stories. 3 () 5
"Insider politics. " 483
Insider stra tegy. 280- 28 1
LNS ( I mm igra ti on and Ncll ura liza tion Ser vice).

146.399
Insti tu te for Pol icy Studies. 273
Insti tutiona l int erests. 268- 269
Institutions. See illso specific illst itlltions
idea-based changes in. 588
innu ence on age nda by. 472-473
trust in. 12 . HS- 89. 89( Og.)
Insu ra nce progra m . 51 n. 5-1H
INS 1'. {)eJqario ( I 984). 146
INS I' Lopez-Menriozo ( 1984). 146
In tan gible factors. in policy-ma king. 12 6. 477 .
487-4S9
Intel ligence Com mittee (I louse). 537
Intelligence Comm itt ee (Senate). 344. 537
Inte nt to d iscrimin a te. 133
Inte rest. on nat ional debt. 492
Interes t-group politics. 476-477 . 470(Ji g.)
business regu lation a nd . 4~ 1-482
economic policy a nd. 502

environmental policy. 561 (fn .). 563 . 566-508
foreign policy a nd. 53 1
In lerest groups. 255 . 264- 290
See nlso Politica l ac ti on com mittees
activities of. 279- 280
bargai ni n g by. 508. 588
bias in. 278- 279
bu rea ucracy a nd. 427

campaign fi nance a nd . 234. 28 2
co nllict of int erest a nd. 285
Congress and. 28 1.320.332. 344.35 1
costs a nd benefits. 476-477
courts a nd. 451-452. 454. 455
economic policy a nd. 50 I . 502
environmcnta lm ovemcnl, 273 . 274
rcmi nis t movement. 274- 275

rormation of PACs. 282- 284
fu nding 01'.270- 278
growth of. S7S. 580.584. 5S6
gun co ntrol a nd . 5S7
incent ives to join. 270-272
in nue nce of starr on . 272- 273
as iniormat ion suppliers. 279- 28 0
insti tuti on a l inte rests. 268- 269

Index
kinds of orgilllizations. 268- 273
lobbyin g by. 27 1. 277 . 280- 282

Ja pan. 80. 192 . 368.498.5 14.53 1. 55 7
Pea rl Harbor a ttack by. 530. 539

majoritarian politics and. 475
membershi p organizations. 269- 2 7()

Japan ese Americans. 16 5

origi ns of. 266-268
poli cy and. 4 71--472
president a nd. 397
prolife rati on of. 265- 266
pu blic-interest law firms. 272
public support. of. 280- 282
"revolving door" and , 28 4-28 5

socia l movements and . 267. 273- 276
tax reform and. 508

th in k t.anks. 273
uni on movement. 266. 267. 273. 275-276
Int erest ra tes. 495. 500. 50 l
Int ergove rnmen ta l lobby. 62
Int erior Department. 4 14. 427
In ternal eflleacy. 90. 90(l1g. )
Int erna l

HCVCJlu C

Service. 287 .41 I

Int erna l Security Ac t ( 1940). 100
Internati onal City / Council fVia nagclllcnt Asso-

ciation,62
Internati onal ist foreign po licy. 539 . 542 . 543
In ternati onal Relations Commillee (I louse).
345. 542
Illlern et. 297- 298
ca mpaigns and. 209. 243. 297.303
pornography on. 107
··Rock the Vote·· web si te. 185
web logs (blogs). 292. 293. 297
Intern et taps. 120
IIllerstate commerce. 57- 58. 4 J 2. 4 I 3. 442.
445
Int erstate Co mmerce Commission (I CC). 4 13.
443.488
Intraparty ca ucuses. 340-341. 34 1(tab.)
Intras tate com merce, 57- 58
·· Investi gat ive reportin g.'· 295. 305
Involu nta ry confessions. 11 7-118
Iowa ca ucu s. 237- 238. 300
Ira n. 3 11 . ')35 . 546
Iran -Cont.ra allai r (1987) . 531. 532. 538.
544
Iraq. Se£' (l/so Persian Gu lf \lVar

invasion of Ku wa it by. 533. 537. 540. 544.
546. 548- 549 . 555
U.S. invasion of. 88 . 157.248.533.534.
54 1.546.557
Iron curtain. 543

·· Iron trian gle. ·· 426-427 . 4 HH
Ir ving. \tVa sh in glo n, 4 32

Isolatio n ist worldview. 543. 5+4
Israel. 231. 368. 531. 532
Issue network . 427
Issue public. 28 1
Italy. 82( tab.). 83 (tab. l. J 90. 198.4 1 I
bureaucracy in . 584
interest groups in. 266
media monopoly in. 293

mu ltipart y system of. 377
taxa ti on in. 505
jac kson. Andrew. 18 0
electi on of 1824 and. 202 . 376
presidency of. 202-2 03. 322 . 375- 377
sta l.es· rights and. 442
Wa s/lilllll OIl G/ol1e nJld. 294
jackson. jesse. 19 1.211.222.225
jac kson ian Democrats. 202- 203. 204 . 375
jacobson. Gary C.. 253

in ternmen t of. in Wo rld War II. 125 . 535
jay. john. 32
jefferson. Thomas. 5. 56. 100. 10 3. 533
Congress and. 322

Constitution a nd. 22. 23.39 . 85
Decla ration of Indepenclence. 18 . 19. 35- 36
election of 18 00 a nd. 240. 376
on esta blished religio n. I I I
Natiolla/ Gazelle and. 294
presidency of. 20 1- 202 . 378 . 384. 388 .
396.440
as Secretary of State. 369. 374. 38 6. 4 1 I.
537
states· rights and. 54
as vice president. 40 1
jefferson ia n Repub licans. 44 2. 463
conflict with Federa lists. H5
foundi ng of. 2 01-21l2. 20 I (fn .) . 2 0 3
MllrbJlry v. Modisoll ( 180 3). 440. 44 1
newspapers controll ed by. 294
jeffords. ja mes. 335. 370
jehovah Wi tnesses. I 10
jewish Federation. 277.515
jews. 87. 95 (li g.). 99.159. 160(fig.). 206
anti-Semitism and. 105 . 125
c u llural co nllict and. lOO. J 01
Israel and. 531
Naxis and. 105 .477.545
pa rty loya lty of. 258 . 259
on Su preme Court. 446. 46 1
johnson. And rew. 240. 388.403
Johnson. Il iram. 2 0 4. 222
Johnson. Lyn don B.. 222. 233 . 369
charac ter or. 3SS
civil righ ts and . 137 . 139
Congress and. 370. 37 1. 394
ciection of 1964 a nd. 167.240.242.258.
30 6.51 8.523
election of J 968 a nd . 250
··Great SOCiety ·· of. 472.582
media and. 3 J 3
Medicare and. 5 18- 5 19
presidency of. 390. 392. 392( lig.). 398.400
Senate and. 536
as Senate majority lea der. 334- 335
vice presidency of. 374. 4 0J
Vietnam wa r a nd. 30 7. 36H . 37 1. 392 .
533 . 53 5
JOint Cenl.er lor Politica l and Eco nomic Stud ies.
273
joi nt Chi efs of Staff. 538 . 55 1. 554.555
JOint Committees . 342
joint operatin g agreement. 298
jo int resolution. 350
joint staff. 554
Jones. Paul a Corbin . 142. 310. 3.11. 396
jordan. Il amillon. 382
Journa lism

··aLLack jou rnalism. ·· 309
conliden tiali ty of sources. 3D 1
ciect ronic. 296- 298. See II /SO Inter net:
Ha dio : Tel evision
governm cnt restrai nts on . 3 1 I . 3 13
opinio n maga zines. 295- 296

pa rty press. 294- 295
poli tica l h istory of. 283- 298
popu la r press. 295
"yellow journ alism." 295

judges. See also specilk judges
appointm enl of. See Judicia l a ppointments
beha vior of. 460
courl ord ered remedies and. 457

im peachm ent of. 403
mandates rrolll. 6 7

politica l ideo logy of. 446 . 448
selection of. 446- 448. 447(ta b. )
judicial activism. 439. 44D. 443 . 444.
459--460.4 63 . 464
judi cial appointments. 385.444.46 1
litmu s test. 447--448
selection of. 446--448. 447(tab. )
Senate approval of. 438. 447. 448
judicial power. 45. 446
judicial rev iew. 28. 438--439
jud iciary. 437--465. See nlso Courts: specific cllses
checks on power of. 460--4 64
fcdera l CourLS. See Federal courls
inde pe ndence of. 438
Supreme Court. .See Supreme Court
under Virginia Plan. 25
judicia ry Act of 1789.44 1
judicia ry Committ ee (I louse) . 308. 345 .403
ju dicia ry Committee (Sena te) . 1 36. 137. 344.
448
jllllg/e. TIr" (S incla ir). 484. 485
Juries. raci a lly segrega ted. 128
jurisd iction
of federa l courts. 448-45 1. 449( l1 g.)
of Supreme Court. 4 4 1. 449 (ng. ). 4 50. 451 .
462--463
ju ry tria l. 35
ju stice Department. 12 1. 287.424.428.447
Antitru st Di vision. 4S0
Kamarck. Ela in e. 3H 1
Kansas. 129
Katze nbach. Nichola s. 132
Kefauver. Estes. 3D7. 308. 484
Kemp. jack. 233
Kennan. George E. 542
Kennedy. Anth ony M .. 58 . 144. 14 7. 454(tab.).
4 56.463
Kennedy. Edward M. ("·Ted··). 278. 282. 488 . 496
on ed uca ti on rdorm. 524

on pockel velo. 395
Ke nnedy. Jo hn F.. 1 36. 167. 2 J 6.233.518
assassin ation of. 137.374. 4 0 1
ca m paign debates. 24 2. 244
chara cter or. 3R8
Congress and. l70
Cu ba and. 534. 540
Democrati c ma chine and. 2 14

economic pol icies of. 499
election of 1960 and. 39 J
foreign po licy under. 533. 538
media a nd. 3 I o. 3 I 3
national cri ses under. 3YH

presidency of. 36 9. 384. 392( llg.). 394.
396.400
religion of. 253 . 258.587
Vietnam wa r an d. 368

Ke nnedy. joseph P II. 2 16
Kennedy. Robert F.. 2 J 6.222
Kentucky Resolulion. 56
Kerrey. Bob. 233
Kerry. john E. 233. 25 U. 297
election of 2004 and. J 60. 186. 2 19.
219(tab.). 239 . 240. 242. 248- 249.
254{tab.)

113

114

Index
Key. V. 0 .. Jr.. 16 3.255
Keynes. John May nard. 497. 499
Key nesianism. 497. 498
Kinder. Dona ld. 79
King. Martin Luther. Jr.. 83.13 5.1 36. 139.310
Kin g. Rodn ey. 449-450
Kirk. Paul. 2 11
Ki ssi nger. Henry A .. 382 . 383 . 387. 533. 538
Klin gberg. Frank L.. 543
"K now-Nothi ng" (A merica n) party. 22 1
Knox. Henry. 369
Korean America ns. 165
Korean war. 100.104. 533. 535. 540. 541.
555

Kore","tslI v. Ullited States (1944).538
Kosovo. 533. 544- 545. 549. 555.557
Kristol. Wi ll iam. 280
Ku Klux Klan. 104.105.285
Kun z. Ca rl Jacob. 99
Kuwait. 533. 537. 540. 544. 548.555
Kyoto Protocol (1997).56 1
Labor Department. 387. 4 J 3. 482.537
Labor unions. 109. l 63. 568. See II/SO speciflc
I/I/;OllS

civi l rights legislation a nd . 11 .273
decl ine in membership. 275(fi g.)
Democrati c party and, 2 ] 6.222,254,

258
demon strations by. 502
governm ent empl oyee. 275 . 276. 276(tab.)
government protection for. 48 1-482
plant closi ng notification and. 476
politi ca l fundin g by. 282. 283
sa fety laws a nd . 471. 48 2
uni on movement. 266 . 267 . 273. 275-276
wage controls and. 498
Labour pa rty (Great Brita in). J 63. 5 14
La ffer. Arthur B.. 498. 499
La Follette. Robert. 204. 21 7. 223
La Follette Progressive party. 22 1. 223
Laissez-faire economy. 413
Lame duck. 404
Land -gra nt colleges. 60
Land grants. 60
Landmark Lega l Foundation. 272
Land-use controls. 565. 567
Language
bureallcralese. 42:;
choice of. in schools. 459
of Co nstitution . 4 1
in newspapers. 304. 305
pol itica l participation and . 190. 192. 19 3
"La rry King Live" (TV program). 297
Laski. Harold . 51
Latin os. See Hispanics (Latinos): speciflc Hispa n ic YrGllJJS

Law clerks. infl ue nce of. 45 I
Law Enforcement Assistance Act. 64

Lawrellce v. Texlls (2 00 3). 1 50. J 51
Lawsuits. See II /SO Supreme Court
civil rights cases. 451-452. 4 53
class-acti on suit s. 453-454
environmental impact and. 485. 487.

565- 566
in federa l court. 451-454
fee shiftin g an d. 452. 454
by interest groups. 272
private. state immunity from. 58
sta ndin g a nd. 452-45 3. 454
by state governments. 473

Lawyers. 449
ac ti vist court s and. 459
burea ucracy an d. 423
class-action suits and. 453- 454
intcrest groups and . 268
Superfund a nd . 572
before Supreme Court. 455 . 462
Lawye rs' Commillee lo r Civil Ri ghts. 272
Leadershi p. 199 . 267.582.588
party. 3 19
Leadershi p Forum. The. 252
League of Conser va tion Voters. 280
League of lations. 534. 539

League of Women Voters. 268. 270. 274. 302
I,ea ks. 308- 3 J 0
I ,cast-restri ctive mea ns. -' 07

Leba non. 5 34. 544. 546
Ll'e v. Weislllall (1971) .114
Lega l Defense a nd Education Fund ( AACP).
272. 28 7
Lega l periodicals. 455
Legislation. See a/so Civil Rights legislat ion:
speciflc laws
a uthorization. 4 28
ca mpaign finan ce laws. 245. 246- 247. 250
courts a nd. 460
pork-barrel legislation. 358. 359.477
president's program. 378. 397-400
reve nue legislation . ori gin of. 3 51

Legislati on by initiative. 13.59.149. 204
Legislati ve bran ch. 20
Legislative committees. 428
Legislat ive court. 44h
Legislati ve fun ction of sta ffs. 346
Legislative process. 347- 3 56. 358
fl oor debate. 348. 353- 355
introdu ction of bil ls. 348. 350
riders to bills. 354
study by com mittees. 348. 350- 353
sy nopsis of steps in. 348- 349
Legislati ve veto. 400. 429.536.537
Legislature. See (I/so Congress: House of Repre-

sentati ves: Senate: State leg islatu res

bicam eral. 25. 32 I
Grea t Comprom ise an d. 27
Legitimacy

cost-benefit ana lysis and. 474
of government action. 470-473 . 588
o f governmen t g rowth , 578

of political parti es. 20 1
political pm·ver and. 5.20

of presiden t. 375
of tobacco price support s. 478
of welfa re programs. 5 13. 523
1,1'1110 11 " K"rtzlllall ( 19 7 1). 11 4
"Letterh ead" orga nizations. 268

Lewinsky. Monica. 3 I O. 3 I I . 392 .40 3.404
Libel. 105.2 38 . 293 . 300- 301
Liberalism
defined. 168- 169
education and. I 36. 16 1. 162.267
in media . 303. 305. 306
Liberal party (G. Britain). 514
Libera ls. I 70(tab.). 2 I 5. 224(tab.)
in hurea ucracy. 422
ca ucus parti cipation or. 237
college studen ts as. 161. Ih 2
congressiona l Democrats. 1 71. 333. 339
elites. 545
judicia l review a nd . 439. 446
"peace di vidend " a nd. 548

public-interest law firm s. 272
in Senate. 33 2-333
th ink tanks. 273
welfare and. 523
Libertarian party. 170 . 2 15. 221
Liberty. 17- 19. 34. See a/so Civil libert ies
Constitution and. 24- 25 . 39 .40
eq ua lity and. 39 . 586. 587
fa cti ons a nel, 32
as natuCHI right.. 18- 19.24
politica l a uthority and. 20
politica l culture an d. 77. 84
Su preme Cou rt on. 443-445
tolerance and. 9 1. 92
Library or Congress. 347
Limbaug h. Rush. 302. 30 3
Lin coln . Abraham. 205. 206. 533
assassination of. 40 I
cabinet of. 384. 386
Civil War a nd. 374. 378. 535
Gettysb urg Address. 155
presidency of. 377. 379. 380
Republi can machine and. 2 14
Line-item veto. 43-45.395
Line Item Veto Act ( 1996).43-45
Lilllllark ilssocinLes. ll1c. v. Willillgboro (1977).
11 3. 11 7
Lippman. ",falter. 542

Lipse!. Seymour Martin. ] 69
Litera cy tests. for votin g. 138 . 18 1
Litmu s test. 447-448
Little Rock. Arka nsas. 13 1.380.470.472
Liuzzo. Viola. 1 37
Livermore. Kentucky. 126
Loaded language. 304. 305
Lobbyin g groups (lobbyists). 277. 344. 346. 588
See also Interest groups
grassroots lobbying. 28 1- 282. 287
as inrormation suppliers. 27Y- 2RO
insider liS. outsider straL egy or. 280- 28 1
intergovernm ent al. 62

public interest. 268. 271. 485
regulation of. 2H 6- 287
Loca l government. 57. 59.4 1 1. 452
a utonomy or. 584
burea ucracy and. 37H
federa l grant s to. 62( Ji g.). 6 3- 64.6 7-68
local orga nizations and, 270

politica l pa rty organ iza ti o n a nd. 2 1 3-2 1 7
we lfare and. 516

Loca lism. 237
Loca l media . 298- 299. 313
Loca l politics. 587
Locke. John. 24
Lodge. Henry Cabot. 536
Logrolling. 477
London Times. 298

Long. Huey. 22 3. 517. 51 8
Lon g famil y. 217
Loopholes (tax deduction s). 505. 507- 508
Los Angeles. Ca liforni a. 2 15. 266. 298 . 449.
516. 565
Louisia na . 128. 183(tab.). 217. 483
Love Ca nal.

ew York. 479

Lowi. Theodore. 37
Luth eran Socia l Services. 277
Lynchin g. 126- 127. 135
McCa in. John . 109.225.2 50.252
M cCai n- Pein gold ca mpai gn IInance reform law

(2002 ). 109

Index
McCardle case. 462
McCarthy. Eu gene. 22 1-222. 250
McCarthy. Joseph R.. 79 . 100
McCa rthy ism. 79
McClosky. Herbert. 169
McClllre's (magazi ne). 29 3
McColI/lell v. Federal EiectiorI Coml1lission
(2 003). 109
McCorvey. No rm a. 144
McCulloch . Ja mes. 55- 56
McClIllocil II. Marylaml ( 1819).55- 56.44 1
McDona ld . Mi c h ae ll~. 186
McGovern . Geo rge. 2 10.222.2 39.242
ca mpaign I1ncmcing. 247, 250

Ma chine politics. 21 3- 2 1 5
McKinley. Willi a m. 206. 295 . 40 I
McLaurin . Geo rge. 1 29
McNama ra. Robert S.. 396
MADD (Mothers Agai nst Drunk Driv ing). 474
Madison . James. 85 . 20 1. 202
background of. 38
on fa ctions, 32. 51. 265

Federalist papers. 32- 33. 34. 5 1. 53
on I" nd gra n ts. 60
Marbllry II. Madisoll and. 440-44 J
on nu ll ification. 56
r"tification of Constitut.ion and. 3 5
Sena!e and. 27
Sta te Depa rtm ent a nd. 4 1 1-412
stales' right s and. 54
U.S. Constitutio n and. 22 . 23. 24. 30. 35. 39
Magazi nes . foreign policy. 542
Magazi nes of opinion. 2 95- 296

Magnu son. Warren. 484
Mai ne. 189. 376
Majorita ria n politics. 9. 476(fig.). 507
business regulation and. 480- 48 1
costs a nd benefits. 475-476 . 565-566
economic policy a nd . 494. 49fi. 497.30 1
environmental policy and. 563 . 564-566

roreign policy a nd. 53 1. 53 2
M edi care. See M edicare

military policy a nd . 546. 548
in parliamentary system. 584
socia l welfare a nd . 5 12. 5 16- 522. 523-524
l(l xes a nd . 50 5

Ma jority leaders (Congress). 334-335. 33fi.
337.333
Majority rule. 25
Majority wh ips (Congress). 336
Ma lappo rtio nment. 235. 236
Ma nd,,!es. 66- 67
Mansbridge. Ja ne. 274
Man sfi eld. Mike. 335
Mapp. Dollree. I 16
Mapp II. Oilio (1 9(1). 11 6. 12 1
Marbu ry. Wi lli am. 440
Marbllry" Madisoll (1803). 440-44]
March on Washin gton (19 63). ] 36
Marginal districts. 327. 328. 33 1-332
Ma rket. media an d. 302. 3 I 0
Ma rket economy. 479
Marriage

polygamous (Mormons). 11 0
sa me sex. 5. 150- 151. 159(fi g.)
Ma rriage pena lty. 493
Marshal l. George C.. 533. 554
Marshal l. John. 55- 56.440. 44 1. 442 . 463
Marshal l. Thurgood . 461. 462. 463
Marsha ll Pla n (1946) . 371
Marx. Ka rl. 9. 479

Marx ists. 220 . 222. See also Socialist party
Marxist view. 9. 86
Mary lan d. 27(fn .) . 55- 56
Mason. George. 6. 28. 37. 38
Massachusetts. 35 . 37. 67. ] 92.203. 322
constitution or. 23
executi ve power in . 372
gay ma rri age in. ISO- l SI. 286
Shays's rebelli on in. 23- 24. 25
"Massachusetts" ballot. 207
Massachusetts Citize ns for Life. 108
Massacilllsetts Spy (newspaper). 18
Mass I.ra llSit. 66 . 269
Matc hing runds. 250
Materia l incentives. 270

Mayer. William G.. 305
May hew. David. 2 J 7.371
Mayo rs, 63
Means test. SIS
Meat Inspectio n Act (1906). 484. 485
Meck le n burg County. North Carolin a. 133
Media. 25 1. 29 1- 3 14 . 485.587
bias in . 293. 30 3- 307
civil rights protests and. 136
competition in . 298- 299. 3 10
confidentiality of sources. 30 I
congressiona l coverage. 307. 308
"culture war" and. 87
effects on politics. 293- 298
clites and. 17 1.299.307
FCC and. 293. 299.30 1
I" reign. 293. 298
free press. 105. 109. 113. 1 J 7.292- 293
government regu latio n of. 293. 2 98
how to read newspapers. 304
Inlern et. See In te rn et
interpreti ng news . See News
journi:l lism. Sel' Journ a lism: Newspa pers
liberalism in. 303- 30 5
loca l. 298- 299. 313
ma rket and. 302.3 10
mistru st or. 306
naliona l. 299-3 00
objectivity in. 305
political agenda and. 473
president and. 307-308 . 390
press secretari es a nd. 30 7- 308
public perceptio n of. 306. 30 7( fig. )
radio. See Radio
re lationship wilh governme nt. 292
"rules" for. 308
rules governin g. 300-303
sca ndal a nd. 333
sensationalism in. 295 . 3 JO- 3 11
stru cture or. 298- 303
tele vision. See Television
vo ters and. 346

Media elites. 171. 299. 307
Media Fund . 252
Med ica id . 143.260. 5 16. 519. 522. 582
gra nts-in -a id and. 60. 69 . 70
Med ica re. 260. 505(fig.). 512. 5J 6.5 18- 519.
58 1.582
expan sion or. 3J8
par ts A and B. 52 1
prescription dru g benefits a nd. 522. 525 . 526
reform of. 520-522
Med ica re Act (1965).5 19 . 523
Med icare Modernization Act (2003). 522
Meet tile Press (TV program ). 299
Membership interests. 269- 270

Menta l tune-out. 306
"Mention." as ca ndidate. 233. 300
Mergers. 483- 484
Merit system. 417-418. 4 30
Meskime n's Law. 426
Mexican America n Lega l Derense Fund. 272
Mexica n American s. 165-166.258.272
Mex ico. 84(tab.). 34 1
trade with. 502
Miallli Ileraid (newspaper). 300

Miallli Herald Publisilillil Co. v. To rnillo (1974).
1 13. 117.302
Michiga n. 7. 524
Microsoll corporation. 480
Middle class. 86 . 87. 2 11. 267. 274
Middle East. 488.556. See also specific cOlllltry
map of U.S. interventions in . 546
Mikulski. Barbara. 2 1()
Milita ry. See also Defe nse Department; Mil itary
policy
bases. budget for. 553
bra nches or service. 554
brea kup of Soviet Union and. 55 0 (la b.)
chai n o f cOlllmand in. 554-555
civilia n control or. J 13. 11 7. 553- 554.555
Court of Mil itary Appea ls. 446. 449(fig.)
foreign policy a nd. 536- 537, 539. 545- 547
gays in. 55 1. 552
Joi nt Chiefs of Staff. 538. 55 1. 554. 555
National Guard. 68. 1 3 I
person nel. budget ror. 550-551
preSidential power and. 3 79- 38 0
read in ess of. 553
weapons. 551. 552
women in. 140.141-142.550-55 1
Military draft. 549-550
protests. lOS. 1 10
women excluded rrom. 14 0. 14 1- 142
Military-indu strial complex. 547
Military po licy. 545- 557
decision- makin g stru ctures in, 553- 555
defe nse budget. 547- 553
majoritarian view of. 546. 548
public opinion of. 539-541. 548
terro rism a nd. 530. 55 5- 5 57
use or milita ry rorce. 536-537. 539.
545- 547
M ilitary rea diness. 553

Military spendin g. 491>-499.547- 553. See also
Defense budget
corporations and. 547
tre nds in. 549(fi g.)
Mili ta ry tribu nals. 120. 12 1
Miller. G. Will iam. SO l
Miller II. CnliJomia (J 973) . 109
"M illionaire's Club." Senate as. 324
Million Moms March (2orJ4). 274
Mills. C. Wright. 9
Mi lls. Wil bur. 5 18. 519
Milosevic. Siobodan. 544. 549
Mi nn esota. 189.215.217
Min orities. See a/so specijk mi"orities
affirmative action a nd. J 46. 147. 148. 149.
47 1
in burea ucracy. 42 1. 421(f1 g.). 422(tab.)
civi l ri ghts of. 58l
in Congress. 325(tab.)
in judiciary. 447(fig.)
opportunities for. 488
politica l participa tion and. 19 3. 1 93(fi g.)
preferential hirin g or. 79

115

116

Index
Minority leader. 334. 335. 336. 337. 353
Minority W hip. 336
Minor pa rti es. 220- 223. 250
facti o na l parties. 203-204. 220-221.
223
ideological parties. 215. 220. 221
presidentia l elections and. 220
third par ties. 2 1 5. 2J 9.220.22 3 . 377
w inn er-take-a ll system and. 22 1
Miranda. Ernesto A .. 118. 11 9
Miranda ru les. 1 18- 1 19
Miml/da \I, Arizol/II (1966). I 18. l21
Mississippi. 182. I 83(tab.). 203
Misso uri Compromise. 442
Mistru st of govern ment. 426
atlack journ a lism a nd. 309
mistrust of burea ucracy a nd. 430. 432
m ist ru st of Congress. 3 17. 320
po litical cu lture a nd. 84- 85 . 87- 89.
89( Og.).9 ]
politica l participa ti o n an d . 189
Mistrust of media. 306. 307(Og.)
Millerrand. Fra n,ois. 534
Mob ru le. democracy as. 25
Moe. Terry Moo 156- 157
Monda lc. Wa lter. 2 10- 2 11. 233. 242.40 ]
Monetaris m. 497. 498
Mon etary policy. 499. 500. 50 I
Money la u ndering. 120
Monopoly. te lep hone. 480. 488
Monopoly law. 480-481
Monroe. James. 202.374 . 388
Montesqui eu . Ba ro n de. 34
Montgomery bus boycott. 1 35
Morality
orthodox vs. progressive. S6- 87
views of. 93(Og.)
Moml Majority. 83
Mormons. polyga my a nd . I 10
Morri s. Gouver neur. 27.373
Mor ris. Rober t. 38
Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD). 474
"Mother's pen sion" programs. 515. Sel'(t/so
AFDC; Wom en. welfare program s and

Motor Veh icle Air Poll uti on Contro l AC I
( 1965). 484(fn .)
Motor-voter law (1993) . 179. 180(Og. )
Mo un tai n Sta tes Lega l Foundation . 272
Moun t Vernon. 22
Moynihan. Daniel Patrick. 3 17. 387. 472
MS BC (TV network). 299
Mu ckra kers. 295
Mugw umps. 203-204. 223
Multiple refer rals. 3 5 1
Mu ncie. Indiana. 80
Munich. Ger ma ny. 543
Mun icipal bonds. taxation of. 56
Municipal electi o ns. 219
Mu niCipa l governme nt. 57. 63. See also Cit ies
Murphy's Law. 426
Mu r ray. Charles. 52(,
Muskie. Edmund . 28 1
anti-po llu ti on cru sade of. 484-485
,Ylyrdal. Gunnar. 78
NAACP. See Na ti o nal Associatio n for the
Advanceme nt of Colored People
Nader. Ralph. 267. 281. 427.581
orga nizations of. 27 1-272.4 19
as po licy entrep reneur. 4n . 484. 485
as preSident ia l ca ndid a te. 250 . 271

NAF'J'A (North Ame ri ca n Free Trade Agreement). S02
Name recognition. 253

Name- req ues t job. 4 1 8
NA RAL (Na ti o nal Abort ion Rig hts Actio n
League). 274 . 273
'arrO\vcasting.297

NASA (Na tio na l Aerona uti cs an d Spa ce
Admi nistration ). -l28
assa u COlIllLy. New York . 214
N ationa l Abortion Rights Action League

(NA RAL). 274. 275
N ational Aeronautics and Spuce I\dmini stra ti on (NAS /\ ). 428
N ational Associatio n for th e Adva ncement of'

Colored People (NAAC P). 128- 129. 165.
2(,7.269- 270.280.435
Bro\\ll/ v. Board of Edl/calioll and. 129 . 433.
462
civil r ights cases and. 43 1- 452
Lega l Defen se and Education Fu nd. 272. 287
Natio nal Associa tio n of Cou nties. 62. 268. 269
National Associi:ILion of Manufact urers. 267

Natio nal Bureau of Sta ndards. 4 1 3
Na tional Catholic Welfare Conferen ce. 267
Na lional cha irman. 208
National Co mmi ssion on Tcr ro ri st A ttacks

Upon the Un ited Stales (911 1 Commissio n). 3. 359- 360. 36 1
Na ti ona l commi ttee. 208

Na tiona l Conference of Sta le Legislat ures. 62
ational crises

Arab oi l ca rtel an d ( 1973).475
Cu ban missile crisis. 398. 53 1. 334
govern m cnt action and. 470
policy entrepreneurs and. 484

presidency and. 37X. 394 . 39~ . 399 . 4J 3.
538
a ti o nal debt. 492. 493(lIg.). 499
history of. 504( lI g.)
atio na l Ed uca ti o n Associatio n. 2 I 7
lat io nal Endowmenl for the Arts. H6
aliona l Environmen tal Policy Ac t (NEPA.

19(9).424.565
Na ti onal Farmers' Union. 26()
Tationa l Federation or Republican \t\'omen.

275

Natiollal Ga:eLte (news pape r). 294
Na ti onal Governors Association. 62

Na ti o nal Guard. 68. 131
Na ti ona l Hi ghway Tram e Safety Administrati on.485
Nmionallndependcnt Reta il Jewelers. 26X
National intelligcnce director. 4 14

Naliollll/ /ll telliWllcer (news paper). 294
Na tional Labor Re lations Board (NLR I3).
481-482
Na tional Leag ue of Cities. 62
Na tiona l Lega l Center fo r the Pu blic Interes t.
276
Nati onal nom in ating convc nti ons. 20~ - 2.1 3.

24 1
caucu s syste m replaced w ith. 203
chara cterist ics of delega tes. 21 2(tab.)
costs of. 245
de lega te a llocat ion form ula s. 209- 2 10
Democratic. 203 . 209- 2 12.217.222.224
Repub lican. 209- 210.211.22 5
Na tiona l Opinion Resea rch Cente r (NaRC). 251
Na lioni:ll Organization for \l\Iomen (NOW). 2 -17,

274.275

Na ti ona l Pe rf'orman ce Rev iew (N PR ). 432. 433
Na ti ona l Republican Congressiona l Committee

(I louse). 336
Na ti ona l Rille Association (N RA ). 109.2 82.
587
N~ ti ona l Right to Lif'e Comm itt ee. 25 1
Na ti ona l sec urity. 248. See a/so Homeland
security

f'ree speech and. 102- 105
Nat ional Security Act (1 947).554
Na tional security adv isor. :; 38

Nationa l Security Age ncy. 532
Nationa l Security Cou nc il (NSC) . 537- 538.
542 . 554.555
Nalional Security Decis ion Directive (NSD D).
538
Na tiona l s upremacy. 54. 55- 56 . 441-442
Nationa l 'J'rame an d Moto r Vehicle Saf'ety Act
(1966). 484(fn .)
NationallJrban Leagu e. 165
National W ild li fe Foundation. 274
National Wo men's Politi ca l Ca ucus. 275

Natioll (m agazi ne). 295
Na tive Americans. 2B5. 429
in Congress. 326
religious bclief's of. I 10
remova l or. 125
Na tural righl.liberty as. 18- 19. 24
Nm'.i Germ any. 545

Nazis. 120. 477
freedom of speech and. 105
NBC network. 296. 299. 3 JO
Nt'a r v. Mil/I/esota ( I 93 J ). 302
NEAs (noncareer execut ive assignments). 417

Nebraska. 376
··Necessary and proper" clause. 56
Negati ve campaign ad s. 234.257.261. 3 I ()

NEI'A (N at iona l Environmental 1'01icy Act.
1969 ).424.565
Nes hoba County. Mississippi. 126. 1 36
Ne therla nds. HI. 90. 231
Ne ustadt. Ric hard. 386. 390
Neu trality. 10 7
Neva da. 4 86, 56 1

New J)eal. 5. 169.222.260.262.4 14.472
See ,,/so Roosevelt. Frank lin D.
Supreme Court an d . 444. 58 1
"New Dea l coa lition." 206. 259
New England town meeti ng. 6. 27
New Ilam ps hi re. 27(fn.). 35
New Hampshire primary. 300
New Haven. Connec ti cul. 306
"New isolationism.·' )44

Ne w Jersey. 27( fn. ). 35.41. 139. 180
New Jersey Plan . 25- 2h. 29 . 3 1 (fn. )
New Kent Cou nt y. Virginia. 132
Newly-i ndu strialized nations (N il s). 345
"New politics ." 280- 2H2
News. See ,,/so Jo urn a lis m: Med ia : Newspapers
belief's of media and. 305
bias in. 293.303-307
govern ment and . 307- 313

in ll ue nee on public. 306
Internet as source of. 297
leaks. 308- 3 10
sen sation al ism in. 295. 3 10-31 1
Ne\>\lsom. Gavi n. 151
Newspapers. 291. See a/so Journa li sm: specific

Ile\VSpapers
compet ition among. 295. 29 8-299

decline of. 298

Index
free press and. 99 .109.113 .11 7
how to read . 304
incumbent endorsement and. 306
libel and. 105
party press. 294-295
po liti cal agenda or. 473

popu lar press. 295
sensat iona lism a nd. 295

watchdog role of. 300
Newsweek. 306
New System. 578. 580- 582
New York City. 35.233.298.565
a fter Revolutionary Weir. 2]
proportiona l representation in. 2 J 9
Tammany mach in e in. 2J 3 .21 5

transit subsidy. 66
World Trade Center attack (9 11 1). 7. 10. H8
New York state. 203. 322.442
currency issued by. 56
Creat Comprom ise and. 27( fn .)
Nell' York Tilll es. 299. 301. 305. 306. 473
Pentagon Papers and. 99. 300
Nell' York Tilll es v. SlIlIivOII ( 1964). 109. 302
Nicaragua. 53 1. 532 . 53H . 544. 547
Nie. Norman . 187
9111 Co mmission. 3. 359- 360. 36 1 See also
September 1 1 terrorist attacks
Nin eteenth Amen dment ( 19 20) . 4 l. l4ll. 182
Ninth Amendm ent (179 1). 36
Nivola . Pietro. 4X 3

Nixon. Ri cha rd M.. 1 34.475.501
attacks on press by. 3 13
cabi net of. 387
Cambodia and. 534. 540
cha racter of. 388
court appointments by. 447. 46 3. 464
debate with Kennedy. 242. 244
election of 1968 and. 221. 239
election of 1972 and. 239. 247. 254. 39 1
EPA a nd. 563
Ford's pardon of. 404
foreign policy under. 533
impeachment of. 308
impoundment of fund s by. 396- 397
national crises under. 398

populari ty of. 392. 392( ng.)
presidency or. 369. 383 . 394.400
resignation of. 403
Sena te and. 536
as vice pres idcnt. 2 33. 40 I
Vietnam war and. ::; 3::;

wage and price con trols of. 3h8 . 414. 470
Watergate scan dal. 87 . 246 . 39 6. 463 .5 37
Nixon . Wa lter. 46 1
NLRB (Na tional Labor Relation s Board ).
4H I- 4H2
No Chi ld Lclll3ehind Act (2 00 1).524
Nofziger. Lyn. 284
NOI IICllklll/1I1'I/ (Soviet el ite) . 1 71
No ncareer cxecutive assign ments (NEAs). 4 1 7
No ncont ributory programs. 516. 518
No ngovernmental organization s. 515

welfare and. 513
Nonprofit orga nizations. 69. 84. 250. 277.
287
welfare and.

515~516

Nonvot ing. 178-180
demographics of. 187
lines 1'01'.190.194
poverty and. 188. 191. 19 3
NORC (National Opinion Research Center) . 25 ]

Noriega . Ma nuel. 533. 547
Norms. 174
North. Oli ver. 382 . 538
North I\merica n Free Trade Agreement
(NA FTA). 502
Nort h Carolina. 27( fn. ). 3 I. 133. 180.
183( tab. ). 30 6
North Vietna m. 548 . 555. See also Vietnam war
NOW (National Organizati on fo r Women). 217.
274. 275
NPR (Nationa l Perfo rma nce Review ). 432.
433
NRA (Nati onal Rifle Association). 109.282.
587

NSC (N ational Security Council). 537-538.
542 . 554
Nucl ear power plants. 586
Nuclear waste storage. 486
Nuclear weapons. 546
Nude dancing ba n . 106
Nul lificati on claims. 535
Nu ll incation doctrine. 56
Obama. Bmack. 319
Obscenity. 105- 107.488
Occupationa l Safety an d Hea lth Act (19 70).
471. 482
Occupationa l Safety an d Hea lth Admi nistration
(OSHA). 4 11 . 4 27 .482.485
Ocea n Dumping Ban Act (1988).66
O·Connor. Sa ndra Day. 144. 147. 454(tab.).
456.46 1. 46 3. 4 64
Ornce-bl ock ba ll ot. 207
Ornce of Com pliance. 358
ornce of Homeland Security. 399. See also
Homeland Security
Ornce of Management and Budget (OM B). 380.
383 . 422.489. 493 . 494. 499-5ll0. 582
Of'llcc of Personnel Management (OPM ). 383 .
4 16.4 1 7.418
Ornce of Special Counsel. 423
Of'llce of Tech nology Assessment (OTA) . 347
Office of the U.S. Trade Rep resentati ve. 383
Office of Thrift Supervision. 424
Orticial Secrets Act (Britain ). 293. 309
Offscts. 57 I
"OfT the record. " 313
Ohio. 113. 502
Oil industry. 278. 280 . 469. 479
Arab oil cartel and. 475
Oi l-producing nations. 545
Oil rights. state-federa l relations and. 60
Old Age. Sur vivors . and Disability [nsuran ce
(OASDl).516
"Old boys' network." 419
Old System. 578. 579- 58ll
OMB (Ornce of Management and Budget). 38 0.
383 .422
O· Neill. Thom as P. "Tip." 237.337
One-issue parties. 221
"On the record." 3 I 3
Open Meetin g Law (1976) . 424
Open primary. 241
Open rule. 353
Opera tiona l grants. 69

Operation Desert Sto rm. See Persian Cu ll' War
Opi nion ma gazines. 2 95-2 96

Opi nion of the Cour t. 455-456
Opi nion-policy congru ence. 15 7
Opinion polls. 15 7. 303 . 391. 392-393(ng. )
See IIlso Public opinion

OPM (Omce of Personnel Management). 383 .
416.417.418
Oral arg uments. 455
"Orderi ng the bilL" 348
Oregon. 189. 569
Organization. ca mpaign. 233-234
Organizational decision. 2 3 1

Organizational entrepreneurs. 267
Organ izationa l voti ng. 331. 332
Orren. Ca ry. 8.1
Orthodox belief. 86-87
OSHA (Occupationa l Safety and Hea lth Adm inistration). 41].427.482.4 85
Osprey (V-22 ) aircraft. 553
OTA (o rnee or Technology A.ssessment). 347
Otis. James. 3 7
OToole's Coroll ary to Murphy's Law. 426
Outsider strategies. 280- 281
Pacinc Cas a nd Electric Company. 108
Pacinc Lega l Fou ndation. 272
PACs . See Poli tica l action comm ittees
Pai ne. Thomi:l s. 23
Plllko" COl/I/ecUclI t (19 3 7).102.103

Palmer. A. Mitchell. lOO
Panama. 5'3.;3 . 547
Pana ma can ~~eaty (1978).281
Panetta. Leon E.. 38 1
Parent Teacher A sociation (PTA). 270
Parkin son's Laws. 426

Parks. Rosa . 1 35
Parliamentary systems. 200

bureaucracy in. 4 10
centralization of power in . 584
Congress compared. 3 18-32 1. 359. 371
elections in. 217- 218
foreign policy under. 534
in Great Britai n. 28. 42.2 31. 259- 260.
319 . 369 . 371 . 4 10. 438
policy-makin g in. 561
popu lar consent a nd. 28
prime min ister in. 308. 309. 368-370.514.
534.584
public po licy in. 259- 260
Parochi al participa nts. 188

Parochi al schoo ls. a id to. 99 . 111- 112,453
Participatory dem ocracy. 6- 8. 59
Partisan ship. See Party identifica tion
Party activists. 225 . 390
Party-column ballot. 207
Party delegates. 212. 212(tab.)
Party iden linca tion. 15 8-159. 198. 252
Congress a nd. 33 9. 340
decli ne in . 189. 198 . 199(fig.)
elcctions and. 206
judges a nd. 446
of labor unions. 216. 222. 254. 258
racc a nd. 222. 258 . 259
Party loyalty. 200 . 206. 255- 256. 258. 259
See also Party identillcation
gender and. 16ll
Party platforms. 262
Party polarization. 338-339. 339(tab.)
Party press. 294-295
Paterson. William. 25
Patriotism. 81 (tab.). 88 . 530
Patronage. 203 . 213. 214, 336.495
bureaucracy and . 412. 417. 418
Pawtucket. Rhode Island. 112
Pay-as-you-go policy. 505
Pay raises. Congressiona l. 362

117

118

Index
"Peace d ividend:' 548
Pearl Harbor attack. 530.539.544
Peckham. Rufus. 439
Peers. 171
Pelosi. a ncy.335
Pe mbroke. second earl of. 438
Pe ndleton Act (1883). 417
Pennsylvania. 21. 22- 23.24 , 27( fn .) . 35 . 37,
2 0 3 , 36 1. 502
aborlion case in. 144
Pension, fo r president. 375
Pension Omee. 412--413
Pentagon. 7. 551. See also Defense Depa rtment
attack on, 530
Pentagon Papers, 99, 238. 300
Pelltilollse (magazine), 105
People's Republic of Chin a, 531
PCI' cllria/1l opin ion . 455
Perkin s. Pran ces. 387

Perot. Ross, 223. 243. 256. 297. 37 1
Pe rsian Gulf Wa r. 533. 534 , 540. 548- 549.
555
Persona l a tli tudes of burea ucra ts. 4 23
Persona l attrib utes of bureaucra ts, 42 1-422
Persona l campaigns, 236
Persona l fo llowin g. 2 J 6- 2 1 7. 236
Persona l-i nterest ca ucuses. 340. 34 I (ta b.)
Personal liberties. See Civil liberlies
Persona l responsi bility, 77. 79
Persuasion of president. 390-394
Pesticides. 560-56 1. 563. 568- 569. 572
Peter Principle, 426
Philadelphi a. Pennsylvania. 1 7. 53-54. 67,
2 14. 298.5 16
Constitutional Convention in. 22. 23 . 26
Ph ilippines. 482
Philosophy. innuence of. 24
"Photo op," 308
Pillsburgh. Pennsylvania, 112- 113
Plaintif!'. 452

Plalllled ParelltllOodv. Casey (1992 ).143.144
Planning (economic theo ry). 497--498
P/,,!}"o!} (ma gazi ne). 242
Pledge of Allegia nce. 84
Plessy, Adolph. J 28
['Iessy v. Fer!lllSOIl ( 1896). 128.129. 134
Pluralist view. 9- 10
Plurality system. 217-218
Pluml naliona l executive. 372
Plyler v. Doe (1982). 146
Pocketbook issue. 494--495
Pocketbook vote. 252
Pocket veto, 34 8 . 394-395. 395(tab.). 397
Poi ndexter. john. 38 2. 538
Poland. 374. 545
Police
due process rights a nd . I J 4, I 1 7- 1 19
power of. 59. 99. 142
violent tactics of. 136- 137. 54 1
Policy. See also specijic policies
bureaucrats and. 422
clien t politics a nd . 284
Congress and. 378
demonstration s and, 190
elections and. 259-260. 262
clites a nd. 171- 172, 174
gridlock and. 37 1. 372
interest groups and, 267. 26 8 . 28 J
judicia ry a nd, 439, 456--457. 459
m akin g of. See Policy- m akin g process
medi a innu en ce and. 306

pluralist vie\-\I of. 9

preferences. See Policy preferences
president and. 397.4 1 7
public opinion and. 79. 15 6. 157.281
scope of. 588
Policy agenda. 580
Policy Committee (I louse). 336. 337
Po licy Committee (Senate). 335 . 336
Po licy e ntrepre neurs. 474, 478--479 . 484
Medica re a nd . 518. 5 19
Po licy-ma kin g process. 468-489,579
cl ient politics a nd. 477-47H . 482- 484
coa litions in . 475. 4H9
decisio n-makin !\ and. 473-475
entrepreneurial poli tics a nd. 474. 4 78-479.
484--485.487.560- 56 1
institutions a nd. 472-473
inta n gible fa ctors in . 477 . 48 7-489
interest groups a nd. 47 1- 472. 48 1- 482
majoritarian politics and. 475- 476.
4 80--48 1
media an d. 47 3
politica l agenda a nd. 469--473
scope of government aclion. 47()-473
Policy preferences. 12. 14. 17 1- 172. 17 1(ta b.)
of convention d,elegates. 22 3- 224 . 22 5
pa rty. 2 59-2 60. 26 2
Polis (Greek city-state) . 6
Po lilica l aclion comm ittees (PACs) . 233.
284(tab.).287
ca mpaign finan ce and. 245. 282-283. 284
growth of. 246(l1g.)
Politica l acti vis m. See Ac ti vism
Poli tica l agenda. 469--473. 489
Polit ica l associatio ns. 266. See a/so Interest
groups
Political HlLitudes

famil y a nd. I 5H- 159
gender a nd. 16()- 161. 16 1(tab.)
of media elite. 299
reli gion and. I 59- 16(), 16 1(tab.)
role of educa tion in. 16 1. 162
Politica l authority. 20. 46. 200. 265
Politica l change. hi story of. I 1- 12

Politica l eonduc!. 169
Politica l co nsultants. 20 8
Politica l cues. 28 0
Politica l culture, 75- 96, 148
civic role of religion in . 82. 83( tab.). 86-87.
92 (flg. )
civil r ights and. 5B5 - 5~H~
compared w ith oth er nati ons, 80- 84

"cu lture war" and. 86- 87
denned.77
eco nomic system and. 77. 79- 80
mistrust of government and. 84- 85, 87- 89.
89( fl g.).9 1
parties a nd. 200- 201
poli tica l emcacy and . 89- 9 1. 90( lIg. )
political system and . 77-79
poliliea ltoicrance a nd. 9 1- 95
ro le of religion in. 83- 84 . 84(tab. ). 8 5
sources of. 84- 87
Po litica l effi cacy. 89- 9 1. 90( lI g.)
Po litical elites. 586. 587
atlitudin al vo tin g and. 332

cou rts and. 4 4 6 . 463
loreign policy a nd. 54 1- 545
on governm ent growth,S 78
ideology a nd. 17 1- 172. 174.332.446
innu ence of. 8- 10

media el ites. 17 1. 299.3 0 7
norms stated by. 174
pu blic opinion a nd . 158. 162
self-interest of. 10- 1 I
on Vie tnam wa r. 299
Political ideolo!\y( ies). 167- 172.225 . 37 1
analyzin !\ co nsistency in. 169- 171
of bureau crats. 422
categories of opini on. 169
Congress d ivided by. 332. 335. 339. 34()
consistency of attit udes. 161>
ideologi ca l pa rties. 2 1 5. 22 1
interest groups. 271. 283
of judges. 446. 448
political elites and. 171-172.174,332.
446
political parties and. 215 . 221
public opinion a nd. 167- 172
ro le of fa mily in. 159
self-identifica tion su rveys. 168(fl g.).
170 (tab. )
termi nolo!\yof. 168- 169 . 1 70(tab.)
Political inactives. 188 . See "Iso No nvoting
Political information, 579
on Intern et. 297- 298
liberalism and. 16 2. 17 1. 188
sources of. 304
supplied by in terest grou ps. 279- 280
votin g pattern s and. I gg, 254
Pol itica l instituti ons, tru st. in. 8 1

Politica l mac hi nes. I ii5, 2 1 3- 2 15
Pol itical name, 2 16-2 I 7
Pol itical participati on. 177- 195.2 16. See "Iso
Votin g

alternate acti vities . 19 1(ng.)
Ame ri can electorat.e. 1HO- I g 7

causes of. 188- 19 I
ed ucation a nd. 162. 188. 19 1
elTecls on governme nt. 179- 180
under federalism. 52
forms of. 187-188
jacksonian era. 180- 181
nonvotin g. See onvolin g
other than voting. 187. 191 (tab.). J92 (tab.).
193 (tab. )
politica l machines and. 214
rmesof. mea nin g of. 191- 193 . 193 (og.)
Politica l pa rties. 197- 229 . See also specijic
parlies
ac ti vis m. 225. 39 0
ca m paign fund ing an d. 250
cau cuses and. 20 2
chan ges in. 58 0

Civil War a nd. 203- 204
Co ngress a nd . 3 18 . 328-33 (). 332 .
334- 340
decline of. 200. 20 7. 26 6. 584
delegates. to national conven ti ons. 217 .
224.226
economic protesl parti es, 22 I

fa ctiona l pa rlies. 20 3- 204. 22 I
fou ndin g of. 2() 1- 202
globa l compari son of. 19 8- 20 1
ideologica l parties. 2 I 5. 220. 22 1
jacksonian e ra. 2()2- 2() 3
leadership of. 3 19
lump-s lIlll grants l o. 245
machine politics. 2 I 3- 2 1 5
minor. See Min or par ti es
modern structure, 207- 209
newspapers cont ro ll ed by. 294- 295

Index
nom inatin g conventions. Set} National nominating convention s

nominatin g role of. 231
on e-i ssue parti es. 22 J

party platforms. 262
persona l following a nd. 216- 2 17
policy pl·ererences. 259- 260. 262
presiden lialn omination and. 223-225
primary vot ing and . 211. 22 4- 225
realignment s. 205- 207. 239. 46 3
in reform era. 204- 205
rise and decline or. 201 - 20 7
sectionalism and. 203- 204
solidary groups. 2 15- 216
sponsored parties. 216
state an d loca l. 200. 2 1 3- 217
stigma auached to. 374--37 5
third parti es. See Minor parties
tri via. 2 12

two-pa rty system. 208. 209(l1g.). 2 I 7-22 0
unity in. 338-340
voting an d. 185. 189.225- 226
Politi ca l power. 14. 18
bureau cratic. 41 5. 425
compctition ror. 309
Co ngress. 3 17. 364--36 5
decentralization or. 58 1
distri bution of. 8- 10. 12. 39
economic power and. 4 79
or rede ral courts. 456--457. 459
rederalism and. 5 l. 59
Hispanic. 258
or incumben cy. 32 8
legitimacy and. 5.20
nature of. 4-6
in parl iamenLary system. 584

or president. See Presidential power
separation of. See Separa ti on of pO\,\lcrs

state parties a nd. 213
Political pressure. 28 1
Political pri vilege. 39
Political qu estion. 4 57
Political rcrorm. 295 . See also Reforms
Polit ical resources. distribution of. 10
Political socializati on. 158- 159
Political system
other nati ons co mpared. 80- 84
politica l culture and. 77- 79
two-party system. 20 8. 209 (l1 g.) . 2 17-22 0
Politi ca l toleran ce. 91 - 93. 92 (llg. ). 9 3( llg.).
94(lI g. )
Political val ues. 4 70
Politicians. media and. 292. 309
Politi cs
civil liberties and. 99- 100
client politics. 280. 284. 4 26
conflict in . See Conll ict
cri sis politics. 398 . 39 9
or economi c prosperi ty. 495- 496
med ia effects on. 29 3- 29 8
na ture of. 12
"n ew politics. " 280- 282
religion and. 8 5. 8 6- 87
"ru les" of. 587
women' s acti vism and. 275

Politics of Dere!Jlllatioli. TIll' (Derth ic & Qui rk).
4 88
Polk. James K.. 3 77. 53 3
Polls. See Opinion polls
Poll tax . I S J
Pollution a llowa nces (banks). 572

Po llution controls. 4154--485 . 561. 564. See also
Environ menta l policy: Tox ic (hay.ardous)
was te

Polygamy. Mormons and. J 10
Poole. Keith '1'.. 340
Poor people. Srr Poverty (poor people)
Popkin. Samllel L.. I So
Popul ar consenL. 2 5. 46

Popularity of president. 390- 392.
392-3 9 3( lI g.).3 94
Popu lar opinion. See Publ ic opi nion
Popu lar press. 295
Populist party. 170. 206 .220. 22J
Pork-ba rrel legislatio n. 35 8. 3 59.47 7
Porn ography. 102 . ] 06. 107. See also Obscen ity
Position issues. 23 9. 240
Pos ition pa pers. 2 34
Posta l Ser vice. 4 11. 4 12. 4 17. 421 (I1 g.). 433
Poverty (poor people). 2 59
courts and. 45 1
governm ent program s and. 4 7 1

Medi ca id and. 519
nonvoters a nd. ISS. 191.19 3
welfare programs and . 51 3.5] 4 .52 6
Powell. Colin. 387
Power. See Politica l power
Power elite theory. 9
Power planLs

acid rain rrom . 566- 56 7
nuclear. 4 86. 586
Praye r in schools. 86. I 11. I 12. 160(l1g.).
460
Precedent prin Ciple. 457
Preemption. doctrin e of. 555
Preference system s. 148

Preferred pos ition. 10 7
Prescription dru g benents. 522. 525. 526
Presidency. 36 7--406
administrative powers of. 3 73 . 379
chan ges in. 580
concern s or Founders a nd . 372-373
under Confederation. 2 1. 22
Con gress and. 200. 373 . 377- 379.
390- 39 1. 391 (tab.). 39 3(ng.)
con trasti ng views of. 368
divided governmen t and. 370- 372
early presidents. 374--37 5
electora l college and. 372 . 373
evolution or. 372- 379
Executive Ornce. 380- 38 5
federa l agen cies a nd. 386. 399.4 1 7
"imperia l presidency." 368. 534
Jacksonia ns. 37 5- 377
legitimacy or. 37 5
national crises and. 378 . 394 . 398. 39 9.
4 13.5 38
nationa l crises in. 39 S
orderly transition in. 40 1--406
pl ural. 372
presidential character. 31515- 389
presidential program. 378 . 397--400
presidentia l starfs. 380- 38 5. 38 7- 388
press coverage. 3 I 0
prime ministers compared. 368-370
qualill cations and benefi ts. 38 0
succession or vice-president. 40 1- 40 2
term of orncc. 2 7. 4 2. 373- 374.405
tri via. 388
union-ma n agement stru ggles and.

4 8 1--48 2
White House Ornce. 38 1-383

Presiden t

appoin tment s by. See Presidential
appointments
authority of. See Presidentia l power
cabinet a nd. 369 . 384--38 5. 384(tab. ).
385(lab. ). 4 11 --4J 2
chara cLer of. 388
checks and ba lan ces and. 29
chronology of presiden ts. A30- A32
conl1dentia lity. 396
con stra ints on program plannin g. 398-3 99
economic advisors a nd. 4 97
executi ve privilege and. 396
foreign policy a nd. 53 1. 53 2
impea chment 01'. 403--404
impo undment of funds by. 396-3 9 7
legislati ve program or. 378 . 397--400
media and. 307- 30S
nationa l sec urity and. 538
as outsider. 369
popu larity. See Popul arity of president
presidential persuasion. 390- 394
press and. 579
reorganization of executive branch .

399-400
responsibility of. 584
separa ti on or powers and. 40 . 4 2
sexual affai rs of. 3) 0
veto by. See Vel.O powers
Presidentia l appoi ntm ents. 38 1. 38 5- 38 7
agencies and commissions. 385
bureaucracy and. 41 1--4 12. 4 17. 420 . 427.
43 6
cabin el appointments. 369. 384-38 7
fiLness rule and. 3 75

judges. 385. 4 3H. 444. 447. 44 8. 4 6]
patronage an d. 417 . 4 18
Senate approva l of. 4J 1. 4 12. 4 38. 447. 448
Presiden tial campaigns. See also Campaigns:
Congressional campai gns

or 1992 . 37 1
congressiona l campai gns and. 232- 2 34

ractors in . 233- 234
fundin g 1'01'.244- 245.247.25 2
position issues in. 239 . 240
television and. 296- 29 7. 30 2
valence issues in. 2 39-240
Presidential ca ndidates. 23 1. 29 7. 300. 302
See a/so sllrfijic c(1Iuii(/at.es
Presidentia l character. 388-3X9

Preside ntia l elections. 238. 254- 256.
2 54(tab.)
See !lIsa Campaigns: Electora l college
of 1796 . 20 I
or I SOO. S5 . 201. 205. 3 76
or 1804. 202
or IS 16. 20 2
or 1H2 0 . 202
of J 824. 202. 376
of 1828.202.204. 205
or J 832.202.203
of 1840. 202
of 1860 . 204. 205- 206. 219 .260
or 1892 . 220
of 1H96. 205. 206. 259. 260
or191 2.2 20. 221.259
of 1916. 259
of 1924. 22 3
of19 32 . 205. 206.259. 26Q 5J7
or 19 36.444. 5J 7
of 1948 . 22 0. 221

119

Index

120
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of

19 52. 2 59
1960 . 2 54(tab.). 39 1
1964. 137. 226. 2 54(tab. ). 260. 306. 523
1968 . 220. 22 1. 2 54(tab.)
1972 . 183. 254(tab.). 39 J
1976 . 189. 254(tab.). 49 5
1980.206.220. 2 54(tab.). 260. 495.5 0]
198 4 . 191. 20 6. 254 (tab.). 262
J 9 88 . 19 J. 20 7. 2 J 9(tab.). 2 54(tab.)
1992 . 187.2 19.2 ] 9(tab. ). 220. 226 .
254(tab.). 30 9. 495
of 1996 . 183. 186. 187. 2 19(tab.).
254(tab.). 262
of 2000. 83-84. ] 83. 186. 2l9(tab.).
2 54(tab.). 30 9. 376. 4 64
of 2004 . 5. 160 . 185. 186. 21 9(tab.).
248-249. 2 54(tab.)
divided government and . 37 1-372
economy a nd . 2 56(fig.). 49 5
Electora l college. See Electora l college
ex it polls at. 15 7
gender gap in. J 60
House of Representatives and. 22 0. 372.
3 73.3 76 . 3 77
parties vs. voters in. 225
partisa n gains in. 391 (tab.)
prim aries. See Presiden tial primary

tri via. 240
voter turn out in . 184(fig.). 186- 187.
186(tab.). 189(fig.)
winning coa li tions in . 257-259
Presidentia l electors. 18 1
Presidential nomination. 202-203. 20 8.
223-22 5.231
Presidentia l power (authority)
ana lysis or. 3 73.406
in foreign policy. 532- 537
military (com mander in ch iet) . 378.
379-38 0.400.440.5 32 . 53 6-537 . 540 .
546. 554
nationa l crisis a nd. 378. 398. 399. 4 13
power to persuade. 39 0-394
power to say no. 394-397
separation of powers and . 40. 42--43
Presidential POlVer ( eustadt). 390
Presidenti al powers (administrative). 373
sale and shared powers. 379
veto powers. See Veto powers
Presidenti al primary. 211 . 224-225. 239. 24 1.
30 7
See also Prima ry elections
funding for. 24 6. 24 7. 25 0
New Hampshire primary. 300
Presidentia l program . form ulati ng. 378.
397-400
Presidentia l transition. 401-40 6
impeachment and. 40 3-404
lame du ck presidents. 404
problems of succession. 374.402-403
vice president's role. 401-402
President pro tempore (Senate) . 336.402
Press. 579. See also Journa lism: Newspa pers
adversa rial. 29. 309 . 3 10. 3 11
freedom or. 105. 109. 113 . J 17. 292- 293
political agenda or. 47 3
Press conferences. 3 10
Press secretaries. 30 7-3 0 8
Price a nd wage controls. 368.414. 4 70. 498
Price guarantees. 4 82
Primary elections. 200. 222. See also Presidential primary

congressiona l ca ndidates and. 3 18
run off. 24 1
votin g in . 224-225. 236
w hite prilll ilry. J 8 I
wi nni ng. 236 . 257

Prime ministers. 30 8. 309 . 308- 370. 514.
534. 584
Pri/llz v. United SUftes ( 1997).58
Prior restr aint. J 0 3. 10 7. 300 . See ,,1.'0
Censorship
Priso ners' ri ghts. J 20- 12 1. 457. 459. 460
Prison systems. 67
Privacy Act (1974). 424. 5S6
Privacy rights. 1 13. 117
la ndma rk cases. 143
sex a nd. 142- 144.] 50
Private bills. 350
Priva te ca lenda r (I·louse). 352

Public opinion. 154- 174. 378
on accuracy in media. 307(l1g.)
on big busi ness. 309
on bureaucracy. 432
on busi ng for racia l integrati on. 134

cleavages in. I f>2- 167
on Cong ress. 330
constituency. 33 .1. 332
cost-benefit a nalysis a nd . 487
defin ed. ] 56- 157
elites. public poli cy a nd . 17 1- 172 .1 74
on cnvi rollmcn ta l laws. 56g( f1 g.)

on fai th-based welfa re. 516
fa mily a nd. I 58- 1 59
on fo reign policy. 539-542. 540(tab.).
541(tab.)
generation gaps in. 159(fi g.)
geographic regio n a nd. 167

Priva te organizations. 81

on gover nment. 584

Private property. 443. SI'e " Iso Propert y
"Private Sector Sur vey on Cost Cant rol. " 4 3 1
"Privileged speech " doct rine. 23R
Probable cause. I 10
Process regul ation. 489
"Pro-c hoice" acti vists. 472

against government growth . 577- 578

"Professionalizat ion of rdorm ," 472

"Professiona l" po lit iC ians. 327. 33 D
Professional soc iet ies. 107
Profi t Illoti ve. 3 10
Progress for A meri ca. 252

Prog ressive bclief. 80- X7
Progressive (" Bull Moose") pa rt y. 22 1. 222.
223
Progressive Policy Inst itute. 273
Progressives . 203- 20 5. 295 . 5 15
Prohibition. 42. 22 3
Pro hibi ti on pa rty. 221. 22 3
"Pro-life" groups. 227
Property. 18.23.33.443
Property ri ghts. 586
Propinqu ity. ru le 01'. 38 1
Propo rt ional representation. 27. 2 19
Pros pec ti ve voting. 255

Protective paternalism. 140
Protesta nt ethic. 85

Pro testantism. 85. 86- 8 7. 206. See "Iso specific
s('ct

Protest pa rties. 22 1
Protests. 192. 496. See " Iso Demonstra tions
protest ma rches. j 36. 190
studen t. 1 35 . 16 1. 477. 54 1
techniq ues or. 579

of gover nmen t spe nding. 502, 504

grassroots lobbying a nd. 28 1- 282
journ a list opinion compa red. 30 3(tab.)
on milita ry policy. 539-54 1. 548
mistru st of government a nd. 87-89
origins of pol itica l alt itudes. 1 57- 162
policy a nd. 79. 156. 157.281
politica l ideology and . 1 59 . 107- 172
politicailOlerancc and. Y I

president and. 380. 390. 399
public policy a nd. 79
race a nd ethnicity. 164- 167
religion and. 159- ] 60. 161(tab.)
schooling and in lo rmation. 10 1- 162
school integration a nd. 136
social cl ass and . 163- 164
on Socia l Security reform . 52 0 (tab.)
on toleration a nd mora lity. 9 1- 93 . 9 2( l1 g.).
9 3( l1g.) . 94( l1 g.)
on trustbust ing. 48 0
two-party system a nd. 219 . 220(tab.)
Vietn am Wa r. 531
Public policy. See Policy
Public schools. See Schools
"Pu bli us." 32
Pllck (magazine). 324
Pu erto Rican s . 165.258

Pu lity.er. Joseph . 295
Pure conserva ti ves. I 70
Pure Food and Drug Act (1906).484
amend ment s to ( 1962). 484( fn.)
Pure libera ls. 1 70

Prox mirc. Wi ll ia m , 23H

Puritan trad ition . 85

Proxy votin g. 344
PTA (Pa rent Teacher Association). 270

Purposive incenti ve. 271 . 272. 274
Pyra mid sta rr structure. 38 1- 382. 383

Public. governm ent in sul ated from . 34

Public accommodations. 128.138. 147
Public bills. 350. See " Iso Bills
Publ ic Citizen. 272
Public confi dence. 584
in busi ness. 309
in institut ions. 88- 89. 89(fi g.)
in Supreme Court. 444. 403. 464( fi g.)
Pu blic debt. 38 . See "Iso Nati ona l debt
Publi c interest. 109
courts a nd. 443 . 460
medi a a nd. 301
Public-interest law fi rms. 272
Pu blic-interest lobbies. 268 . 485 . 568
Pu blic [nterest Research Groups (PIRGs). 272
Publicly-owned enterprises. 4 J 1

Qua kers. 23
Quayle. Dan. 309
Qui rk. Pa ul. 488
Quorum. 353
Quorum ca ll. 353
Quotas. 79. ] 46- 148. 149
Raa b. Ea rl. 169
Race
cleavages in pu blic opin ion . ]64-16 7
party identification and . 164. 222 .2 58 .259
politica l pa rticipation and . 188. 189(fig.)
in segregated public accommodations. 12 6.
138. 147
Race relations. 78

Index
Ra cial discriminati on. 148 . 149
Ra cial profil ing. 13Y

Ra cial q uotas. 169.451
Racism. 79. 174
Radica l Republicans. 322
Radio. 293. 296. 297. 298.483
regu lati on of. 299 . 30 1-302
talk shows. 30 2. 303- 3(H. 3 13. 5n
Rad ioac ti ve wa st.e. 56 1
Randolph. Edmund. 25. 27. 369. 372
Rand om sa mple. 15 7
Ran gel. Charles. 283
IlIISIt! v. BIIsII (2 004 ). 121
Ratifica ti on of ConstilUtion. 3 1. 38- 39
Ratin gs of legislators. 280
Rayburn. Sam. 32 1. 336- 337
Reagan. I~o na l d. I 1. 224 . 272. 5lX
appointments by. 4 22 . 4 27 . 50 I
assassina tion attempt on. 282 . 40 I. 402
busing a nd. 134
ca mpaigning by. 233. 234.39 1
chara cter of. 389
deregulation and. 488. 489
economic policies of. 37 1. 498-499. 504.
584
election of 1980 and . 242. 255. 257. 39 1.
495
EPA an d. 485. 570
ethi cs violati ons in ad m inistration of. 284
federal a id and. 66. 68
foreign policy under. 533 . 544
governin g style of. 397-3 98
jud ges appoi nted by. 144. 147.4 38.447.
44S. 46 1. 463. 464
libera l lobbies an d. 277
military interventions by. 5 34. 540
natio na l cri ses under. 398. 538
OS II A ad ministrati on and. 482
popul a rity of. 393( flg.)
presidency of. 262 . 368 . 369. 385. 3g8.
394. 397- 398 . 400.470
reelection of. in 19 84.206- 20 7.23 9.240.
25 4.255- 256
SIt-liT orga niza ti on or. 383
vetoof. 137
Reaga no mics. 498- 499
Rea li gnin g periods. 205- 207. 239.463
Reapportion ment. 235- 236
"Reasonable expectation of pri vacy. " 11 7
Reasonableness standClrd. 14()

Recall procedure. 59
Recession (19S 1- 1982).256
Ileco nstruction. 378 . 462
Recruitment and retentio n. 4 15-4 19
"Rcd-diaper babi es." 159
Redistricting. 235- 236. 33 9
J 990 census a nd. 327. 329. 33 0
Red Scare. 99. 104. See IIlso McCar thy. Joseph
Red tape. 425- -n6 . 430. 43l. ,132-433
wel rare program s. 523

Reed. Thomas 13 .. 32 1. 322-3 23 . 342
Reed v. Reed ( 1971). 142
Referendum. 7. X. 59 .204
Refo rm era . 204- 205
Reform fa ctio ns. 20 3- 204. 215
Refo rm pa rty. 22 1. 223
Refo rms
ca mpaign lin ancc. 250. 2 8 2. SSg

of civil serv ice. 4 12. 417--4 18. 432-433
of Con gress. 3 I 7
"professionaliza tion" of. 4 72

Regan. Donald . 3H2

Hegell l,s of t.ll e Un ivas it!/ of Califor/l ia v. Bakke
(19 78) .1 47 . 149
Regul ato ry agen cies. 215 4. 460. See !lIsa Governm ent regulati on : spe('~fic {/gel/cli

Rehabil itation Act ( 1973).43 1
Rehnquisl. Wi lliam . 58.448. 454(tab.). 4 56. 4 6 3
Reindeer Service. 41 4
"Relati ve deprivation." 471-472
Religion. See IIlso speciflc religioll
ch urch-slate separation. 11 O. 111 - 11 3.45 3
civic role of. 82. 83(t ab. ) 92(lI g.)
First Amendment an d. 101. 102. I 10- 1 13.
453
freedom of. 102. 110- 11 3. 11 4
funda mentali st groups. 206. 268
landmark cases . 11 4
po litical belier an d. 8 5. 86- 87
po litical participa tion and. 1S8 . 193

ro le in politica l altitudes. 159- 160.
16 1(tab.). 2J 9
Religious nonprofit. orgclllizations. 277
Religio us orga nizations. we lfare and. 515-5 16
"Religious Ri ght. " 86- 87
Remedy. judicia l. 1 3 1.457
Remin gton. Frederi c. 295
He/lo v. IIC/~ U ( 199 7) . 109
Reorga nizalion Act ( 1939 ). 4 00
Represent atio na l votin g. 33 1- 332
Representati ve democracy. 6- 8. 27-28
Representatives. See "Iso Congress: House of
Reprcsc nlat.ives

constitu ency opi nion and. 33 1- 332
direct election of. 2S . ISl
interest groups C1 nd. 282
persona l PACs of. 282- 283
power of. 323
qualifications and pri vileges. 23X. 3 19- 320
Repu blican ca ucus. 237-238
Republ ica n Committee on Comlllitt ees (Senate).
335.33 6. 337
Repu bli ca n Nationa l Commillee (RNC) . 163 .
20S- 209. 2 1]. 224
Repu blica n part y. See also Democrati c party: Jefferson ian Republican s: Polit ical par ti es
ac ti on agai nst caucuses. 340
burciJ ucrati:t,a ti on of. 208-2 09

Civil War and. 20 3. 205. 206
coa li ti ons in . 258- 259
con trol of House by. 232 . 328- 33 0. 338.
342 . 344
delegate allocation formul as. 209- 2 10
devolution and . 68. 69. 70
election of 1860 and. 205- 206. 2 19
election of 2004 and. 248
gender a nd . 160
identification with. 199. 199 (lIg.)
independent vo ters and. 25 4-2 55
inll ati on wor ri es of. 496
527 organi7.at.ions and. 252

origin s of. 20 5- 20 6
politica l elites of. 17 1
presidency and. 259
reform factio ns in. 203-204. 2 I 5
schoo l reform and. 524
Senate and. 248. 34 5
South and. 2 18(tab.). 248. 327. 33 0. 3 H
split -olTs from. 22 1. 222.322
support for military by. 555
t.ax refo rm and. 507

two- pa rt y system and. 2 ] 7- 22 0

voler turnout and . 190

vole-seat gap. 328- 32 9. 329(tab.)
Republica n Senatorial Co mmittee. 336
Repub lica n Sl udy Group. 332
Republics. 27. 34
S(~e

also Representative dem ocracy

Resea rch Commillee (I louse) . 336
Reser ved powers. 29
Resoluti on Funding Corporatio n. 424
Resolution Trust Corpora tion. 424
Resources Commi ttee (I louse). 345
Respon sibi lit y
denia l of. 232
fo r environme nta l clean up. 570.5 72
government. 495
indi vidua l. 77. 79.232
president an d. 584

Restricti ve rule. 353
Retrospecti ve votin g. 255- 256

Revenue legislation. origin of. 35 1
Re venue sha ring. 63- 64. 66
Reverse diserimination.l 45 . 148.455
Revoluti onary War. See American Revolutio n
··Rcvolvingdoor.·· 284- 285
Rh ode Island. 21. 24. 27(fn.). 3 1. 37. 112
Ribicofl'. Ab raha m. 484
Rice. Condoleezza. 387
Ilice. Donna. 300
Hie/ /llIDlld 1'. CroSOll ( 1989). 149
Rider. legislative. 35 4
Ridge. Tom. 399
Ri ghts. unalienable. 19

Right-to-life movemen t. 2 15. 275. 472
Riker. William II.. 5 1
Riots. 1960s. 471 - -1 72
RNC (Republican Na tiona l Committee). 163 .
20 8- 209.21 1.224
Robert s. Owen J.. 444
Roberts. Paul Cra ig. 49g
Robert son. Pal. 225. 2 3 7
Robertson's Rule. 426
Rockefeller. Nelso n. 242. 403
Rockefeller Fami ly Fund. 276
Hoe v. Wlldd I973). 14 3-144
Rogers. Wi lli am P.. 5 33
Roll-ca ll votes. 33 1. 3 55. 356
Roosevelt. Frankl in D.. 167.2 12.2 14.2 33 .
480.534
att empt to assassi nate. 40 .1
bureau cra cy and. 400

cabinet 01'.384. 387
Congress a nd. 370. 371. 394
electio n of 1932. 5 I 7
election of 1936 and. 5 18
foreign policy under. 533.539
Japanese A meri can inLcrnm cnl and. ] 25.

535
nation al cri ses under. 398

New Dea l of. 5. 1(,9. 206.222. 259.4 14.
444.58 1
polls and. 399
presidency of. 369. 373.38 1. 388. 390
press and. 30 7. 3 I 0
Senale and. 5 36
Socia list proposa ls a nd. 222-223
Supreme Co ur t and. 444 . 46l. 462
veto power and . 395
\·velfare progrclills and . 5 1 7- 518

Roosevel l.'l'heodore. 105.22 1. 222. 447.5 1 5
presidency 01'. 378 . 388
press a nd . 30 7. 309

121

122

Index
as "trustbuster. " 480
as vice presiden t. 401
Rosenthal. Howard. 340
Hostker v. Goldberg (19 8 1). 14 1- 142
Rota ry Club. 270
Rout ine news stories. 30 5
Rudman. Wa rren . 504

Rules
bureaucratic. 433 . See "Iso Red tape
ca mpa ign finan ce ru les. 109. 246- 247.
250- 25 1
congressiona l ethics rules. 360
for court sta ndi ngs. 4 52-453
govern ing media . 300-303
House rules. cha nges in . 343- 344. 352- 353
of politics. 587
procedura l. 58(i
Ru les and Admin istra tion Commi ttee (Senate) .
344
RulesCom mi llee( House).136. 137. 32 1. 336.
34 5. 352- 353
Speaker of the House a nd . 322 . 32 3. 353 .
364

Ru le 22 (Senate). 324. 325
See " Iso Filibuster
Rumsfeld . Dona ld. 386
Run off elections. 2 ] 7- 2 1 R
run off prim ary. 24 1
Rusk. Dea n. 533
Russia. 17. 54 2-543. 546. 548. See " Iso Soviet
Union (former)
Russia n Revolution (19 ] 7). 17
Sabotage. burea ucratic. 420. 422-423
Sa fe districts. 327-328
Safety standa rds. 48 2
for automobi les . 470- 4 7 1. 474 . 478 . 484 .
4 85
nuclea r power plants. 586

SI.. Louis Count y. Missouri. 216
Salary. of represen lati ves. 3 ] 9
Sales ta xes. 50 5
Salvation Army. 277
Sa me-sex (gay) ma r riage. 5. 1 50-15 1.
1 59(fIg.). 16 1.286
Sa mpli ng error. 1 57
Sanchez. Loretta. 156
Sa n Fra ncisco school system. 459
San ta Barba ra. Ca lifornia . 273. 484. 563
S,,"to Fe Illdepelldellt School District v. Doe
(2 000). 11 4
Santeria reli gion. J 10
SBA (Sma ll Busi ness Administra tion). 427.487
Sca ife Foundation. 276
Sca lia. Anton in . 58. 14 7. 454(tab.). 4 56. 463
Sca nda ls
Clinto n ad ministration . 14 2. 3 10.3 11. 396
in Congress. 33 0. 333
media coverage or. 300
publ ic atte ntion and . 484
Watergate. 87 . 246. 3]] .392.396. 4 63
"Schedule C" appointments. 4 1 7
Schenck. Charies T.. 103. 104
Schellck v. Ullited States (19 ] 9). 103. 104. 109
Schlesin ger. Arthur M.. j r.. 534
Schlleider" New Jersey (1939). 14 6
School di stricts. 57
Schools. 78 . 100 . See also Educat ion : Students
asbestos in . 569
bil in gua l educa tion in . 10 1.459
desegregation of. See Desegrega tion

federa l reform or. 524
free-speech rights in. 109- 1 10
pa rochia l. public aid to. 99 . 111 - 11 2.453
praye r in. X6. 111. 11 2 . 160(fI g.). 4 60
school vo uchers. 11 2. 1 59(fIg.). 16 1. 165.
524
Sch umer. Charles. 11
Sc humpeter. Joseph. 6. 7
Sc hwa rzenegger. Arnold. 297
Science Committee (House). 345
Scientific un certa inty. enviro nment a nd. 560.
563 . 566.568. 56 9- 57 1
Scorekeeper fu nction of media. 299-3 00
Scott. Dred. 442. 461. 463
Scribner's (m agazine). 29:;
Scrubbers (anti-poll ution dev ices). 567
Searc h a nd seizure. I 1 3- 114. 11 6-11 7. 11 9
Search wa rra nt. 30 I
Sea rs. David . 79
Scali Ie. Washin gton. 88. 298
Secretary of State. 40 2. 538
Jefferson as. 369 . 374. 386.4 11. 537
Secretary of Treasury. 499 .500
Secret ba llot. 185
Sectiona lism. 203- 204
"Section 1983" suits. 452
Scculdr humanism, 87

Securities a nd Exchange Act ( 19 30 ).484
Sedi tion Act (1798). lOO. 103
Sed ition Act (19 18). 100. 10 3
Sed ition laws. 100. 103- 104
Segregation. See !llso 13 1'011'11 v. BO!lrd oj EdllC!l/iOIl
de ji,cto and de jll re. 13 2
in public accommodat ions. 128. 138. 147
raCia lly segregated juries. 128
Select committ ees. 342
Selective allenti on. 306
Self-i nterest. 10- 11. 30
Self-re lia nce. et hic of. 79. 5 14
Senate

approva l of judges by. 4 38 . 447. 448
approva l of ol'l k ia ls by. 411. 4 ] 2
calendars. 352
chan gin g ideo logy in. 332-333
changi ng organization of. 343
Constitutio n and. 27. 28

domination or. 373
elec ti on to. See Congressiona l election s
evolution 01'. 323- 325
fi libuster (Rule 22). 235 . 324. 354-3 55. 536
11 00r debate in. 354- 35 5
foreig n policy and. 53 6
im peachment a nd . 403
Kyo to treaty a nd . 56 I
legislati ve process in. 352.353
party orga nization 01'. 33 4- 335
pa rty voting in. 33X
politica l agenda a nd. 472-471
preside ntia l appointments a nd. 385
Repu blica n control or. 248. 329. 34 5. 504
stan din g committees 01'. 344
television coverage of. 308
treaty approva l by. 368. 37 1. 372. 373.
375 . 532 . 534
vice president a nd. 401-402
voli ng in. 35h

Senatoria l Comm illee (Democrats) . 209
Senators
di rect election or. 324 . 36 1
power of. a nd benefi ts to. 3 19-32 0
public opin ion a nd. 33 2

qua lifications and priv ileges. 238
state legislature selection 01'. 28. 32 1.
323- 324
Seneca Fa lls Convention (1848) . 14 0
Senior citizens (elderly) . 27 1. 5 18
Senior Execu ti ve Service (SES). 420
Sen ior ity

in House comm ittees. 323 . 338. 339- 340 .
342. 363
in Supreme Courl. 454(tab.). 455
Sensationa lism . 295.310-31 1
Sensenbrenn er. Ja mes. 34 2
Separate-bu t-equa l doctri ne. 128-129
Separa tion of church and state. 11 0. 11/ - 1 13.
453
Sepa ration of powers. 23 . 28. 40. 358. 56 1
checks and ba la nces a nd. 3D. 578
mod ilkat ions to. 4 2- 43
September 11 terrorist attacks. 7. 10.88 . 90 .
119.139.3 11. 389.47 1. 492
Sl'e also Terrorism
911 1 Commission. 3. 359- 360 . 36 1
foreign policy a nd. 53 0. 539
homela nd security a nd . 6 1. 359- 360 . 399.
4 14
Seq uential referral. 352
Sequ ester. 505
Se rbia. 533 . 544-54 5
Service role of burea ucracy. 4 / 2-4 14
Service strategy. 526
SES (Senior Executive Service). 42 0
Set aside laws . 147
Seve nt eenth Amendment (19 1 3). 32 4 . 36]
Seventh Amendmen t (1791 ). 36. 102
Seventh Day Advent ists. 111
Sex. See !llso Homosex ua l (gay) ri ghts:
Porn ography

politics a nd . 3 10
pri vacy a nd . / 42- 144. 150
Sex discri mination. 138. 14 1
Sexism. 174
Sexua l harass ment.. 142 . 448
Sha lala. Donn a E.. 38 1
"Sha re Our Wea lth " program. 5] 7
Sharon. Ariel. 10 5. 30 I
Shays. Da niel. 23
Shays's Rebellion. 23- 24 . 25
Sheppa rd. Samu el II .. 99
Sherm an. Roge r. 28. 35
Sherma n Act (1890). 480
Shultz. George. 533. 53g
Sierra Club. 2 69 . 270 . 274 . 287
Silell / Sprillg (Ca rson ). 5G8
Simon. Pa ul. 2 33
Simple resolu tio n. 35 0
Simpson. O. j .. J 64
Sinclai r. Barbara . 338
Sincla ir. Upton. 484. 48 5. 51 7
Sin gle-issue groups. 257
Sin gle-pa rent fam ilies. 513. 522
Sipuel. Ida Lois. J 29
Sit-i n demonstra tions. 135. 190. 273 . 285
Sixteenth Amendment ( 191 3).4 14.46 1.
507
Sel' also Fedcfi:l l inco m e tax
Sixth Amendment (179 1). 36.4 1
"Sixties. " the ( 1960s). 192.268.286
activism in. 58 1- 582
bl ack riots in. 47 1-472
60 Millll/es (TV progra m). 292
Sla nder. 10 5. See IIlso Libel

Index
Slavery. 102. 26U
connict over. 49. 2U5-206
Constitution of U.S. silent on. 36- 37.38
Declaration of Independence and. 19
DI'ed Seal! decision. 442. 46 I
nationa l supremacy and. 44 1-442

politiCia ns wi th personal followings in. 2 I 7
presiden tial elections in , 206. 207
Republican party in . 2 18(tab.). 248.327.
330.333
slavery and. 37
voting registration in. I 83(tab.)

nu llilicalion doctrine and. 56

South Ame ri ca. 76

Senate and, 323

South Ca roli na, 27(fn .). I g3(tab.). 203
"Southern Manifesto" ( 19 56). 131
Sovereign immunity. 452
Sovereign ty
federalism and. 51
state. 21. 58-60.445
Soviet Union (form er). 50.497. 546. See also

Small Bu siness Ad ministration (S BA). 427.
487
Sma llllusiness Committee (House). 345
Smallllusiness Comm ittee (Senate). 344
Smith . AI. 212
Smith . Howa rd. 136
Smith. Samuell-larrison. 294

Smith Act (J 94U). I UO. 1 U4
Smith 's Prin Ciple. 426
Sniderman. Paul M .. 79
Snowbelt states. 65
Socia l class. See "Iso Elites: Workers
class consciousness. 86
ill Marxism. Y
middle class. 86 . 87. 21 1. 267. 274
politica l participation al1(1. 188. 19 2
public opinion and. 163-J 64
upper-middle class. 163. 193.2 78. 54J
Socia l di versity. federalism and. 72
Socia list Labor party. 221
Socialist party. 222- 223
Socia lists. 92. 22 0. 221
Socia list Workers party. 215. 22 1
Socia l movements. 2 1 5. See "Iso speciflc
I1IOVClIlCIll S

interest groups and. 267. 273- 276
196Us. 268. 286
Socia l policy. 79-80
Socia l Security. I 59(l1g.). 581
benellts. 488. 495.503 . 505(lIg.), 523
origins of. 5 16- 5J 8
reform of. 5)9-520, 520(tab.). 583
taxes. 499.509.512.519- 520
trust fund. 428. 523
Social Security Act (19 35).514. 5 J 8. 522, 523
Social services. providers of. 84. 422
Social welfare. 5 I J- 528, See "Iso Welfare
programs

client politics and. 512. 5 13. 524-525. 526
education programs. 524
features of. 513-516
ICderal fundin g of. 515
majoritarian politics and. 512. 523- 524
majorilarian programs. 516-522

prescription drug benents. 522 . 525. 526
reformi ng. 5 19-522
Soft money. 209. 247. 250. 252. 281!
Soil Conservation Service. 424. 428
Sole-sourcin g. of weapons manufacture. 552
Solicitor genem l of U.S .. 455
Solidary incen ti ves. 2 15- 2 16. 270 . 274
Soma lia. 544. 557

Sophomore surge. 236
Soras. George. 252
Sound bites. 296
Sources of information . 301. 304
"Sou rces of Soviet Co nduct. The" (Kennan ).
542
Souter. David. 144. 44g . 454(tab.). 456
Sout h, the. 65
black vo te in. 126. 138. 180- 181.182
Democratic party in. 167.203.204
desegregatio n and. 131

Ru ssia

collapse of. 545
contain ment pol icy l'or. 542-543 . 548
Cuba an d. 531. 534
iro n curtain and . 543
politica l clites in . 17 1
Spaat,. Ca rl "Tooey." 552
Spain. 2 1. 84(tab. ). 295
Spea ker of the [-Jouse. 335-337,344.402
Gingrich as. 323 . 333 . 337-338. 342
patronage and. 336
power of. 321. 322-323. 336
referra l of bills by. 352. 353
Rules Committee a nd. 322. 323. 353 . 364
Specia l-act charter, 57
Specia l-district governments. 57
Spec ia l election . 43
Specia l in terests. 32 0.48 3. See "Iso Interest
groups
Specia l revenue sharing. 63

Speech. freedo m or. 286 . See also Freedom of
expression

Speechmaki ng. 242-243 , 296 . 390
"Spinning" news. 311
Split-ticket vot ing. 207, 20S(l1g.). 372
Spock. Benjamin. 11 3. I 17
Spoils system (patronage). 203. 2 1 3. 336.4 12.
417.4 18
Sponsored parties. 216
Spots (TV ads). 240
Spolled owl. 569
SS I (Su pplementa l Securit y Income). 516.
516(l1g.)
Staff
campa ign. 233-234
congressio nal. 345- 347. 346(li g.). 582
foreign policy. 538
Joint Chiefs of Sta ll 554
White House stafr. 38 1-383. 38 7-388
Sta ndards of Omcia l Conduct Committee
(I-Iouse). 345
Sta ndin g. courts a nd. 452-453. 454
Stand in g committees. 342. 344. 345
Sta ndin g (divisio n) vote. 355
Stan' decisis. 457
Sta rr. Kenneth . .3 I ] . 4 0 3
State and Loca l Fisca l Assistance Act ( J 972).
64
State and loca l political parlies
distribution of power in. 213-214
ideologica l pa rties. 2 1 5
machi ne politics. 2 13- 2 I 5
one-party states. 21 7
orga nization. 200. 2 I 3- 2 17
party bosses. 2J 3
personall'ollowings. 2 16- 2 1 7
solidary groups. 2 I 5- 216

sponsored parties. 2.1 6
two-party system. 2 1 7
State and loca l regu latio ns. 482
State constitutions. 20-21. 59
anti-gay amendmen ls to. 150

Constitution of U.S. and. 22-23. 27
state bi lls of rights. 34
State cou rts. 59.448
cla ss Clclion suits in. 454
jurisdiction of. 449. 449(l1g.). 450
State Department. 411-412. 422. 424. 428
foreign policy and. 532. 537. 538. 542. 557
Sta te Fa rm In surance. 454
State legislatures. 100
election to. 2 I 9
govern men ta l stru ctu re an d. 50. 51- 52
leadership in. 322
reapportion ment of. 28( fn .)
U.S. Senator selection by. 28. 32 1. 323-324
State of the nion Address. 308. 378
State politica l parties. See State and loca l politica l parties

States. 55,452
abortion rights and. 14 3
Bill of Rights applied to. 35. 102 . 104
changing representation in House. 236(tab.)
conditions of federal aid to. 66. 67-68
elections and. 181. 219
electora l college and, 373
environmen tal laws an d. 5 6 1, 565
federa l aid to. 582
federa l grants to. 62(lig.). 63. 64
Great Compromise a nd. 27
intergovernmental lobbies. 62
interstate commerce an d. 53- 54.442.443.
445
inte rstate riva lry for federal money. 65-66
leaders hip in. 72
mandates and. 66-67
media regulation and. 30]
nationa l policy initiated by. 473
tobacco-settlement payments to. 70
welfare and. 69. 513. 515. 5 16
State sovereignty. 2 1. 58-60.455
States' rights. 3 I . 54. 442. 579. See also
Antifedera lists
States' Rights ("Dixiecrat") party. 220. 22 1.
223
Stationary sources. 564
Steel indu stry. 502.531. 535
Steering a nd Policy Committee (House). 336.
337,364
Steering Committee (Senate). 335
Steffens. Lincol n. 295
Stenberg ,I, C(lI'!J(lrt (2000). 143
Stephanopoulos. George. 382
Stevens. John Pa ul. 454(tab.). 456
Stevens. Thaddeus. 322
Stevenson. Ad la i. 224. 307
Stewa rt. Potter. 106
Stockman. David. 383- 384.422
Stock market. 520
STOP ERA, 27 5
Straight-t icket voti ng. 207
Strict-constructionist approach, 439
Stri ct scrutin y sta ndard. 125. 1. 40- 141. 148.
149
St udent activism. 272 . 285
politics and. 161 - 162
protests. 135. J 61. 477.541
radica ls. of J 960s. 159. 16 I. 58]

123

[24

Index
Student rights. 109- 11 0. See also Colleges a nd
uni versi ties

Students for a Democratic Society. 285
Subcommittees (Congress) . 34 1.342 . 34 3.346
Subsidies. 4 ] 5. 584
farm price supports. 478. -+82-483
la x deductio ns as . 508
Succession Act (1886) . 402
Suga r quotas. 482-483
Sulfur emissions. acid rain and. 566
Sunbelt states. 65
Superdelegates. 2 1 I
Superfun d program. 478. 4 79.570.5 72
Supplemental Security Income (SS I). 5 16.
5 16( li g.)
Supply-side econ omics. 498
Supreme Court. 27.3 1. See also Federal courts:
judic ia ry: specijlc cases
on abortion and privacy. 143- 144
in action. 454-456
activism of. 440. 443. 444. 46 3. 464
admini strative agencies and, 414

on a flirm a ti ve actio n. 146- ] 47. 148 .149
on Africa n A m eri can vot ing righ ts. l S I
a lle mpts to regu late commerce. 57- 58
Bi ll of Ri ghts applied to stales by. 35. 102.
]04
on bureaucra ti c power. 4 1 5

on ca mpaign Ilnance reform. 25 1. 288

c hief justices. 349(tab.). 455
on church-state separation. 11 0. I 11 - 11 3.
453
class action suits and. 453. 454
on co nfiden tiality of so urces. 30 1
Congress a nd. 32 1
0 11

corporate ri ghts. 108

deseg regation and. 12 8- 134. 1 37
develop me nt of. 43 9-445
election of 2000 and. 251.464
on Eleventh Ame ndme nt. 58
on exclu sionary ru le. 1 14- 11 6
on executive privilege. 396
on Fou rteenth Amendment. 35. 104.
128- 129
govcrn m CIJl and economy. 442-443
government and politica l liberty. 443-445
on hate crime. 105
on homosexu a l righ ts. 101. 149- 150. I 5 I
on ind ividual ri ght s. 67
on involuntary confessions. 1 17-1 18
judi cial review and. 28. 438. 439 . 44 1
jurisdiction of. 441. 449 (flg .). 450. 451 .
462-463
on legislative veto. 4 00. 429.5 37
on lin e- item veto. 44 . 45.395
on lobbyin g restriction. 287
on nati onal conven ti ons. 24]

on national supremacy. 54- 56 . 44 1- 442
on obsceni ty. 105- 10 7
on oil ri ghts. 60
politica l agenda and. 472
power 01'. 457 .459.460-464
public opi nion of. 46 3. 464(fl g.)
redistri ctin g and. 236
on reg ulatory (lgcll cies. 413
rev iva l of slale sovereignly and. 445

Roosevelt a nd . 444. 46 1. 46 2.581
o n schoo l prayer. 8 6
o n sc hool vo uchers. 52 4
sediti on law a nd. 100. 103. 104

Senate a pprova l of nominees to. 438
seniority in. 454(tab. ). 455
on symbolic speech. 108
on taxation. 55- 56. 507. 577
on Ten th Ame ndm ent. 53. 67
on term limits. 327
t ri via. 461
on vo tin g age. 183
all w ar powers . 534- 535
women's ri ghts and. 139- 142
workload of'. 450. 45 1. 454
\I\lrit s of cerUornri and. 4 50-45 1.455
Slfre- Tall v. Natio"a/ Labor J{(J/aliolls Board

(19 84). 146
Suspec t cla ssification s. 12:;
S lIm llll "

Clwriolle-NlecklCIIlm r!l Board of Edllca-

Lioll (1971). 133 . 13-+
Swea tt. Heman. 12 9
Sweden. 81-82. 82(tab.). 84( tab.). 192.198.
4 11
income redistribution in. 514
taxes in . 584
Symbolic ra cism. 79
Sy mbolic speec h. 108
Tart. Wi llia ml-loward. 22 1. 2 6 7. 374.388.461
Ta liba n (Afg hanistan ). 88 . 120. 399.539.545
Talk shows. 296. 197.302.303- 304. 3 13
Talmadge family. 2 t 7
Ta mm any Ha ll. 2 1 3. 21 5
Taney. Roger 13 .. 442. 444. 46 1. 463
TA l F (Te mporary Assis tance lo r Needy Families). 51 6 . 516(flg.) . 523.526
Tarifrs. 56 . 61.239.502
TClsk Force on Inequ alit y and A m erican Dem oc-

racy. 10
Task Force on Regul atory Relier. 4 89
Taxati on. 18.125. 507- 5 l 0
closi ng loopholes in. 50S. 50 7- 509
Congress and. 49 3
democratic nations compared. 507(lig.)
economic policy a nd. 492. 493. 496-497.
505
I"deral-state rela tions a nd. 55- 56 . 61.68
gasoline. 566
I touse or Representat ives and. 35 1
on imports.
inco m e ta.x.

See Ta ri ffs
See Federa l incom e tax

nonprofit excmp ti on . 287
in parl iamcntary system. 584

poll ta x. 18 1
of pollutin g indu str y. 479
prot.est of. 496
reform of. 262. 37 1
revenlles from. 504
Shays's Rebellion and. 23
Social Security. 499. 509. 512. 519- 520
supply-side economics and . 49H
Ta x credi t. 516. 512
Ta x-exe mpt orga ni za tions. 287.

See also Non-

profi t organ izati ons

Tax loopholes. 505. S07- 508
Taxpayer sta tu s. lawsuit s a nd. 452 . 453

Tax relorm. 505. 507- 509. 5 10
Ta x Reform Act (1986). 37 1. 50S- 50 9. 5 I 0
Tay lor. Zac ha ry. 378.401
Tea msters Unio n. 488
Teens Agai nst Tobacco Usc. 47 7
Telecommun ications Ac t ( 1996). 3D I
Teleg raph. inven tion of. 295

Telephon e merger. 483-48 ..
Telephone monopoly. 480. 488
Telephone servi ces. 147. 2S 1
'I'clephone so licitation law. 473

Te lephone taps. 120
Television. 291;. 579. 582
"big th ree" netwo rks. 296 . 297(tab. ). 310
cabl e. 297. 2 9 1; . 3 11
ca mpai gns. 240. 242. 24 3. 244. 257.
302-303
candidate coverage by. 30 7
competitiven ess in. 3 10-3 11
coverage of Cong ress on. 307. 308
FCC and. 293.299
news programs. 292
presidentia l ca mpaigns and. 296-29 7. 302
on segregationist violence. 136
watchdog role of. 300
Teller vo tes. 35 5. 356
Te mpora ry Assistan ce for Needy Families
(TAN F). 516. 5 16( l1g.). 523. 526
Tenth Ame ndment ( 179 1).36.53.58 .66. 67.

142
Term limit s. 327.342 . 345 . 358
Te rm or oflk e. preside ncy. 373-374.405
Terrorism. 3. 88. 90. 139. 248 . See also
September 11 te rrorist attacks
civil liberties and. I 19- 1 2 1
Congress and. 359-362
democracy and. 7

Depa rtment of Homela nd Security. 49 . 6l.
70. 359- 36Q 399 .41 4
foreign polic)' a nd. 530. 539
military pol icy a nd. 530. 555-557
war on. 120. 36Q 368.389.399.400
Texas. 143 . 150. 165. 183( tab.). 329. 496
'f",,'{fs v. Joll/lSol/ ( 19 89). 109
Th em ati c ca mpai gning. 23 4
Think tan ks. 273
Thi rd parties. 2 15. 2 19. 220. 223. 377
See (flso Mi nor parties: speciJk part!)
Thi rd World. 545
Thirteenth Amend me nt (1795).46 1
Thomas. Cla rence. 58.438.439.448.
454( tab.).456
Thune. John . 248
Th urm ond. J. Strom . 221
Ti lden. Sa muel J.. 2 12
Timber industry. 569
Tillie (ma gazine). 10 5. 30 I . 306
Times Beach. IVli ssouri . 479
Tin sda le. Elkana h. 234
Tobacco companies. 473.478
protest again st. 477

To bacco scttle men ts. 70
Tocquevi lle. Alex is de. 10.76.77.82 . 47 l.
530- 53 1. 586 . 587
"Tonight Show w ith Jay Leno" (TV program ).
297
Topeka. Kansas. 129.453. See also /31'011111 "

Board of EdlfcatiOIl
Townsend . Franc is 10 .. 517
Toxic Substances Control Ac t ( 1976). 484( fn. )
Tox ic (hazardous) waste. 56 1. 564
Superfund and. 478 . 479.570.572
Tracie restr ictio ns. 50 1-5 0 2. Sec also CO I11merce. regu la tion of: Tariffs
Transpo rtation. 62 . 147
Transportation a nd I nfra stru ctu re Committee

(I louse). 345

Index
Tra nsportati on Department. 43 1
Treasury Department, 37 5, 412 , 4 14, 424
Treasury Secreta ry, 499, 500
Trealies, Senate approval of. 368, 37 1, 372.
373 , 375, 532 , 534
Trea Ly of Versai lles. 325

Trial balloon, 30 4, 305
Tria l by jury, 3 5
Troi ka, 499
Tru cking indu stry, 488 , 4 89
Truman, David IL 50
Truman , Harry S, 224 , 394, 400,533 , 538
election or 1948 and, 221
Medicare and. 5 18.519

popularity of. 392 , 392( lI g,)
Senate and, 536
steelmiJl seizure a nd , 460--46 1,535
veto power a nd, 39 5
as vice president. 2 33, 401
"'I'rustbust in g," 480-4 81
Trustee a pproach. 3 99
Tr ustee vs, delegate debate, 237

Tru st runds, 428
Turkey, 536
Twenty-nrst Amendment (1931), 42
Twen ty-seco nd Amendment (19 51),373 ,401
Twenty-third Amendment (1961 ), 183
Twenty-mlh Amendment (19 67) , 384,402
Twenty-sixth Amendment (197 1), J 83, 46 1
Two-party system, 208, 209(ng,), 2 I 7- 22 0
Tyler, jo hn , 40l
Ty ner. james N.. 2 I 3
UAW (Un ited Auto Workers) 1 L 2 16, 565, 568
UI (unemploymenl insurance), 514, 5 16, 518
Unalienable rights, 19
Un-A merican Activiti es Committee (I-lou se) ,
78- 79
Unemployment. 47 1, See also Employ ment
econom ic policy and, 495, 496, 499
Great Depression, 517
Unemployment compensation, 474, 517
Unemployment Insura nce (U I), 5 14, 516, 51 8
Unified governmen t. 370
Unimodal distribution or votes, 338
Union ca lenda r (House), 352
Union mo vement. 266, 267, 273, 275- 276
See a/so Labor unions: specific III/ions
Unipolar world. 555

Unilari an Church, 87
Unitary system, 50, 5 1, 52
United Airlines fli ght 9 3, 36 1
United Auto Workers (UAW), 11,2] 6, 56 5,
568
Uni ted Kin gdom, 8 1, See also Great Brita in
United ations, 539, 555 , 557
Uni ted Press International (U P!), 299
U,S, Cou ncil or Mayo rs, 62
Us. Maine (battl eship), 295
Us. News & World lleport. 299
US v, Brignoni-Price (1975), 146
USA Patriot Act (200 I), 120, J 2 1
USA TodllY (newspaper), 299
Ullited States Code, Section 19 83,452
United States Information Agency, 537
Ullited States \I, Leol/ (l 984), 12 1
UI/it ed States v, Lopez ( 199 5), 58
Ullited Stntes v, Morrison (2 000), 58
United States \I, Nixon (19 73),396
UI/ited States \I. Virginia (1996), 142

UI/it ed Steel Workers ", Weber (1979), J 49
United We Stand America , 223
Uni versities, See Colleges and Uni versities
Uni versity or Alaba ma, J 32
UniverSity of Ca lifor nia. 455
University of Californi a at Da vis. 147. l49
Uni versity of Ca liforni a at Los A ngeles. 60

Uni versity or Chicago, 25l
Uni versity of Michi ga n, 14 9
Uni versity or Oklah oma, 129
Uni versity of Texas Law School. 129,149
Unpopular ideas, tolerance of. 92(fig,)
Unsllfe al AllY Speed (Nader), 484
UPI ( niled Press In ternationa l), 299
Upper-m iddle class, 163, 193,278 , See "Iso Elites
opposition to Vietn am war by. 541

Urba n League, 267
Vaca ncies Act (1868),385
Va lence issues, 239- 240
Va lues, 77-78 , 80 , 85, 9 1, See also Mora lity
pol icy and, 4 70, 488
Va n Buren, Martin , 20 3, 40 I
Van ce, Cyrus, 533
Va nde nberg, Arthur II.. 536 , 54 3
Van Essen, Thomas, I I
VAl~ See Voting-age pOJlulation (VA P)
VEl' (voti ng-eligible population), 186- 187,
I 86(tab,), 329
Verba, Sidney, 80- X I, J 87,269
Vermont. 22. 15 1

Versai lles, Trea ty of. 325
Veteran s' Arrairs CommiUee (I louse), 345,42 6
Vetera ns' AI'!>, irs Committee (Senate), 344,426
Velerans' Affairs Department. 426
Veterans' gro ups, 267, 4 13, 426
Velerans' pensions, 495
Veto message. 394

Veto powers, 25 , 137,378,394- 396
And rew jackson and, 322, 375
Congress a nd, 43--45, 34X , 358, 395, 396
legislat ive veto, 400, 429,536 , 537
line-i tem, 43-45, 395
pocket veto, 348, 394- 395(tab, ), 39 5, 39 7
Sena te and jud icial nomin ees, 447
Vice president. 401-40 2,537
Vietnam policy, 544
Vietnam wa r. 368, 37 1,392 ,5 37,5 39
elile opi nion and, 299
Jo hnson and, 533
Nixon a nd, 534, 535
press coverage of. 299,307
pu blic opinio n of. 53 1,540- 541
Violence
police tactics, J 36- 137, 54J
race ri ots. 1 35

Violence Agai nst Women Act (1994), 58
Virgini a, 21. 2 7(fn ,), 132 , 18 3(tab,), 217, 44 J
Virginia Military Institute, 141
Virginia Plan , 25, 26, 29
Virginia Resolution. 56

Virtue, cu lti vation of. 30
Visuals (TV ), 240, 242
Vogel. David, 56 I
Voice votes. 355

Volunteering, 162,183, 187( l1 g,)
ca mpaign, 234

Voter registral ion, 1 78- I 79
blacks and, 1 38
Motor-voter law, 1 79, 180( ng,)

politica l machine and, 2 13
regu lations, 185- 186, 189,204,213
in South, J 83(tab,)
Voters
African America n, 126, J 38 , .180- 181. 188
apalhyo r. 1 78, See also No nvoting
character and. 252

cong ressional elections a nd, 318
delegate opin ion and, 224, 226(tab,)
direct democracy and , 59
economic conditions and, 494-495, 496
Hispanic, 191. 258
in cumbency and. 330

independent. 254-255
media and , 346

oi l prices and, 479
pa rtisanship or. 1 72,252, 260(fi g,), 306,
339
policy prererences or. 171(tab,)
politica l parties and, 185 , 189, 225-226
presidentia l election and, 373
recuitin g or. in criti ca l election s, 206
regis trati on of. See Voler registration
Spa nish-spea king, 303
spending limits a nd, 502
split-ticket voting by, 3 72
targetin g, in presidential campai gns, 234
VOler turnout. 178-1 79, 192
ca lculati ng, 1 79(tab,), 186- J 87, 186(tab,)
in co ngressiona l elections, J 83, 329
decl ine in, 188-191. 584
election of 2004, 248
globa lly, I 79(tab,), 19 2
Hispa nic, 258
machine politics and, 213
negati ve ads and, 257, 3 10
politica l party a nd , 190- 191
in preSidenti al elections, J 83 , 184(l1g,),
186(tab,),225
Voting. See (Ilso Nonvoting

age a nd , J 83 , 188, J 89(fi g,), 461
attitudina l. 332-333
civil rights a nd, See Vo tin g rights
compulsory, 190
in Congress , 236- 237, 33 1-333 , 338, 344.
355- 35 6
economic in terests and, 252, 255-256
by eighteen-yea r-olds, 183,46 1
fraudin , 185,204 , 21 3,214
global comparison of. 163 , 19 8
loya lty in, See Voters, partisan ship of
multi-lingua l instruction s for, 190
organizationa l. 331. 332
politica l inrormation and, 188
politica l parties a nd, 185 , 189
prima ry voti ng, 224-225, 236
property requirements ror, 180
prospective voti ng. 255
retrospecti ve votin g, 255-256
schoolin g and, 188 , 1 89(fig,), 191
selr-reports of. 187
socia l class and, 163
split-ticket voting, 20 7, 20 8(l1g,), 372
stra ight-ticket voting, 207
wo men , 4 1,52, 18 1. 182, 184, 274, 286
Voti ng-age population (VAP), 1 78, 179,
18 3(tab,), 184, 186- 187, 186(tab,), 248
Voti ng-eli gible popu lation (VEP), 186- 187,
186(tab, ), 329
Voting fra ud, 185, 204, 213, 214

125

[26

Index
Voting ri ghts
or Arrican American s. 138.180-18 1. 182
orwomcn.4 1. 52 .1 8 1. 182. 184.2 74 . 28(,
Votin g Rights Act (1965 ). 182.260
Votin g Rights Act (1970). 183
Voting Rights Act Amendments ( 1982 ).66
Voting specialists. 188

Web logs (blogs). 292. 293. 297
Web sites. See I ntern et
Webster. Da nie\. 37h. -+0 1
Webster p. Reprodl/I't.iv(' lIealtil Se/'vit'es (J l)1!l)).
143. 144
Wed nesday Club. 332
Welfare programs. 94. See also Medicaid: Socia l
we lfare

Wage a nd price con tro ls. 368. 4 14. 470. 498
Wagner Act ( 19 35). 481
"Wa lk-in schools." 133
Wa llace. George. 132. 16 7. 182 . 2 17.22 3
election of 1968 an d. 2 1S. 22 0. 22J
Wa ll ace. Henry. 22 I
Wa ll-or-sepa ration principle. 111 - 11 3
Wall Street /ol/mal. 299
Wa Ish. Lawrence. 3] I
War. See also M il itClry: specific \Vaf
bureaucratic powers in. 4 13- 434
civil liberties restricted in. 100. 10 4
cold wa r. 548, 555
government action and. 470

power to declare. 5 32. 536-537. 539. 800
presidency and . 400
public opinion and. 540- 541
War Depa rtme nt. 4 12
"\l\Ia r on Poverty," 582

Wa r on ter rorism. 120. 3f>O. 368 . 389 . 399.
400
War Powers Act (19 73). 536- 537
Warren. Earl. 129.444. 464
"Wars or nat iona lliberat ion." 548
Washin gton. D.C .. 7. 183.278.298
Washi ngton. George. 5.2 1.22. 38. 201
cabinet of. 3(,9. 384. 38('
Congress and. 322
Constitution and. 23. 25

presidency of. 35. 369. 373 . 374. 37 5
presidenti a l succession and. 404
selr-restraint or. 372
Washillgtoll Globe (newspaper). 294
Washington Lega l Foundation. 272
W(lsililliitoll I'ost. 299. 300. 305. 3 I I
Washi ngto n (sta te). 569
Waste. bureaucratic. 430. 431
Waste. toxi c. See Tox ic (haza rdolls) waste
Watchdog runction or med ia . 300
Watergate scanda l. 8 7. 396.463.53 7
press coverage 01'.246. 3 11. 392
Water Qua li ty Improvement Act ( 19 70).484.
484(fn.). 56 3
Wa tt. James. 272
WatL. Melvin. 34 1
WaLLS. J. C.. 340
Wa xman. Henry A .. 215
';Wax man-Berma n orgclllizatioll," 2] 5

Ways and Means Committee (House). 342.
34 5. 35 1. 501
Medicare and. 518-519
WEAL (Women's Eq ui ty Action League) . 275
Weapo ns of

111 ( 15S

destr ucti on. 546

Weath er Undergrou nd. 285
Weaver. R. KenL. 70
Weaver. Robert. 387
Weber. Max. 9.79

Cli nton's reform or. hI! . 37S-379
court-ordered. 457
devolut ion refor m. 6~. h9. 70
legitimacy of client clClim s. 477-478
pol itical machin e and. 2 14

state sovereignt y and . 58- 59
Welrare Reform Act (1996). 378- 379
Welrare-to-work progra ms. 69. 5 15.516.526
Wellstone. Pa ul. I 83
West Berl in. Germany. 531. 544
\J\lcs tmorciand. \I\filliam. 45 2

Whig pany. 203. 205. 219. 37S
Whip. 334. 335.336.337
Whistle Blower Protectio n Act ( 19X9 ). 423
Wh ite-colla r wo rkers. 192.4 16-4 17
"Whi te flig ht. " I I 3. I 17. 134
While I-louse. 375 . 38 I
White Il ouseOmce. 38 1- 383. 582
\I\fhil c Ii olise Offlc e of Fai th -Based (-lIl ei COJllm un ity Jn itia ti ves. (,2

Whit e Ii ouse press conrerences . 3 I 0
Whil e Ii ouse press corps. 308. 3 I 0
White I louse starl'. 3D7. 387- 388
Wh ite prima ry. 18 I
Wh ites . 164- 165. I 64(tab. ). I 65(tab.). 182 .
19 3( Og.). 258. 33 1
m inority interests and. 4XX
respo nse 1.0 urba n riOlS by. 472

"white fl ight." J 1 3. 1 I 7. 134
Whi tewa ter sca nda l. 309
WhiLten. Jamie. 568
Wholesome Poul lry Act (1968). 484(fn.)
Wi ldavsky. Aaron. 532
Wi lderness Society. 274
Wiley. Harvey. 4S4
Wilson. James. 27. 28. 3S. 39. 372
Wilson. Woodrow. 49-50.22 1. 259
a nt.it rust legislation and. 480
as a uthor. 379
presidency 01'. 374. 378. 379.402.534
Senate and. 325. 536
wanime powers of. 4 13. 543
Win chell. Walter. 99
Wi nn cr-rc\"lard systems. 212

Winn er-ra ke-all elections. 2 11 . 2 17. 2 18- 2 19.
220.376
Winograd. Morley. 2 10
Wisconsin. 189 .20 3.204.215.2 17.24 1.
5 15
Wom an's pa rty. 22 1
Women. 95(fig.)
in civil service. 42 1(fig.)
in Congress. 325- 32 h. 325( tab.). 335
Consl itution an d. 4 1

excluded fro m dra rt. 140. 14 1-142
reministmovement. 106.274--275
in government jobs. 419

in judiciary. 447( lI g.). 456. 46 1
inmiii tary.140. 14 1- 142.550- 55 1
al nat ional party conventions. 2 I 2

po rnography and. 106
preferential hirin g of. 79
in president's cabi net. 387
protests by. 274
rights or See Women's righ ts
wel rare programs a nd. 474.5 13.5 15.
522- 523. 524
welfare reform and. 68

Women's Eq uit y Action League (WEAL). 275
Women's Lega l Defense Fund. 272
Women's righ ls. 139- 144. I 59( li g.). Seelliso
Abort ion
affirmative action and. 146

land mark cases. 142
vot ing rig hts. 4 1.52. 1 S I . I H2. 184. 274.
21>6
Woodward . Bob. 300
Workers (workin g class). 9.163.541. 581
unions and. 267
white-coll ar. 192. 416-4 17
Work ethic. 79.85. Seenlso Employment
Work fare. See Welfare-to-work programs
World Trade Center attack. 7. 88 . 530
See also September I I terrori st attacks
\!\Io rl e! T ra de Organization. pro test of. 88
Wor ldvicws

conta inme nt. 542-543. 544 . 545. 54 8
disengagem ent. 544. 545
of foreig n po licy clites. 542-545
human rights view. 544-545
internationali st. 539. 54 2 .54 3

isolationism. 543

World Wa r I. 413. 539.5 43
Espi onage an d Sed ition Acts (19 17- 19 J 8).
100.103
World War II. 414.539
containment policy and. 543
in come lax rates in. 507
Japa nese A meri can in ternme nt in. 535

Smi th Act of 1940 and. 100. 104
work or \'VOlllen in. J 40

World Wide Web. See Inlernet
Wright. Jim. 333.337
Writ of cer/iol'llri. 450-45 1. 4 55
Writ of Imbeas I'orp"s. 35. 102 .462
Wyoming Te rri tory. 4 1. 52
)'ale LalV jOllrllal. 4 55
Ycllmv journa lism. 29 5
YOllllllsto,vlI."'eet b 'l'lIbe v. SalVwr ( 1952).538
Yo uth . See also III1r1el' Student
eighteen-yea r-old vote. 183.46 I
in terest in politica l news. 298. 298(ng.)
1960s socia l movements and. 268. 286
Youth Build. 515
Zacch ini. 113. I 17
/.(lcc/Jilli v. Scripps- ll o\Vard Bro(l(ic:astil1fJ Co.

( 1977). 11 3. 11 7
Za ller. /o hn. 162. 169. 174
Zellllllll v. Si lll/llolls- lllI,.ris (2 002 ). J 14. 524
7:ol'lll/c/, v. Clallsoll (1952 ).1 14

*

PHOTO CREDITS

Chapter]
p. 2: Joseph So hm / The Image Works: p. 5: Ram in
Ta la ie/Co rbis: p. 6: Photri /Topham / Th e Ima ge
Works: p. 7: Spen cer Platt/Getty News Im ages:
p. 1 1: Dou g Mills/A P/ Wide World Ph otos.

Ph otos: p. 1 37: AP/ Wide World Pholos: p. 1 39:
Co rb is!l3ellm a nn: p. 14 0: 'J'oph am / Th e Image
Wo rks: p. 14~: Ma rk Richa rds/ PhotoEdi t; p. ISO:
Brian Snyde rlReuters/ Corbi s.

CI"'llter 7
Chal)ter 2

p. 154: Billy B.Ba rn es/ PhotoEdil: p. 156: Jollatha n

p. 1 6: Tony Freeman/PhotoEdi t: p. 18 : Library of
Congress: p. 19 : Lafayette College Art Collecti on.
Easton. PA: p. 21: Photo by MP I/Getty Images: p. 22:
no credit: p. 23: Free Libra ry of Ph iladelphi a: p. 24:

No urok/ Ph otoEd it: p. 1 5 8 : Bob Daemmrich /The
Im age Works: p. 1 62: Tony Freeman / PhotoEdit:
p. ] 63: An drew Holbrooke/ Corbis: p. 1 72 : Olivier
Corelli n Visu/Corbis.

Corb is / Betlman n: p. 20: Den nis Degnan/ Im age

State: p. 32 WI' left: u.s. Govern men t Printin g
Office: p. 32 WI' riglll: Collection of The New-Yo rk
Histori ca l Soc iety: p. 32 1)()/.IOIII: Libra ry of Con gress: p. 33: Ame rica n Ant iq uaria n Society: p. 37:
Chi cago Histo rica l Society: p. 38: The Granger Collection: p. 39 left: Th e Bostonia n SOCiety/The Old
State I-louse: p. 39 rigllt: Na ti onal Co llection of Fine
Arts. Smithsonian Instituti on.

Chapter 8
p. 1 77 : Fred Rou ser/ Reuters/Corb is: p. 180: Washin gton Sec rewry or Slate: p. J 82 le}l: © Fli p
Schulk/ Corbis: p. 182 right: Departmenl of Social
History/S mithso nian In stitution: p. 184: Library of
Congress: p. 185: Patrick Olea r/ PholoEd il: p. ] 90
top: Daniel Brody/Stock Boston: p. 1 90 /JOttOIll : Bob
Daemmrich /Sloc k Boston.

Chal)t;er 3
p. 4~ : Bob Daemmrich/S tock Boston: p. 52: The
Gra nger Co ll ect ion: p. 54: Bowdoin Collectio n
Mu seum of Art. Brun sw ick. ME. Bequest of the
I ionorable James Bowdoin III: p. 56: The Gran ger
Co llectio n: p. 60 : David Young WolfllPho toEdit:
p. 6 1: Nancy Kaszerman /ZUMA/Corbis: p. 64: AP/
Wide Wo rld Photos: p. 65: Pa ul S. Conkli n/P hotoEdit: p. 68 : Charles W. Luzier / Reuters/Corbis.

Chapter 9
p. 19 7: Chris Hondros/Newsmakers/Gelly New
Images: p. 20(): Gleb Ga ranichlReulers/Getty News:
p. 2 0 2: Ten nessee Hi stori ca l Soc iety: p. 210 :
IVlvlv.delllocmts.o rg: p. 2 1 I: Rick Wilking/ Reuters/
Corbis: p. 2 14: By perm ission of the Houghton
Li braryill arvard Un ive rsity: p. 216 : Corbis/
Bellmann: p. 222 lop: Library or Congress: p. 222
bottolll: CorbislBell ma nn : p. 223 : Corbis/Bettmano.

Chapter 4
p. 75: AP Photo/ Greg Wa hl-Stephens: p. 77: The
Gra nger Collection: p. 78 : Corbi s/Beltmann: p. 79:
Topham /The Im age Works: p. 8 1: Corbis/ Bettmann:
p. 83: Tony Freema n/ l'h otoEd it: p. 8S "1t: Beth
A. Ke isser/ AP/ Wide Wo rld Ph otos: p. 88 ril/fl t:
Re uters NewMedia Inc.lCorb is.

Chapter 10
p. 230: AI' Photo/ Ed Andrieski : p. 233: Toma s
Mu sc ionico/Con tact Press Ima ges: p. 234: Corbis/
Lletlmann: p. 24 3 top: Library or Congress: p. 243
I)OUOIII: Corbis/Bettma nn : p. 244: Time Li fe Piclures/Gelly Images: p. 252: Gelly Im ages: p. 257 :
Michae l Evans /Corbis-Sygma.

Chapte r 5
p. 97: Ralf-Finn Il estofl /Corb is: p. 99 : The Gran ger
Co llectio n: p. 104: Corbis!l3ellmann: p. 105: Tim
Boyle/Gelly Im ages: p. 108: From III Oppositioll:
IlII lIges of !\lIIeriC!JII Dissellt ill tfle Sixties. © 1968
by Benedi ct Fernandez: p. 11 1: R. Cranda ll /The
Im age Works: p. ]1 8 : Paul Co nkl in/ PhotoEdil:
p. 11 9 : Philade lphia Police Department: p. 120: AI'
Phot o/A I lazeera.

Chapter 11
p. 264: Jim WestiThe Image Works: p. 266 le}t:
Mi chael Schum an n /Sa ba Press/Co rbis: p. 266
right: Michael Schumann /Saba Press/Corbis: p. 269 :
Stock Mo ntage: p. 270: Denni s MacDo na ld / PhotoEd il: p. 27 1: The Nader Network © 197S : p. 274:
AF P/Gelly Im ages: p. 277: Jell Greenberg / PhotoEdit: p. 279: J. P. LafTo ntlCo rbis-Sygma : p. 286:
We nd y Maeda / The Boston Globe/ Merlin- Net.com.

Chal)ter 6
p. ] 24: Flip Schulke/Corbis: p. 126: Library of Congress: p. 128: By permission of The Houghton
Library / Harvard University: p. 131 : UPUCorbis/
Lle ltm a nn: p. 132: Steve Sh apiro/B lac k Star:
p. 13 3: Ted Crowell/Black Star: p. 1 35 left: UPI/
Corbis/ Bettmann: p. 135 rigflt: AP/Wide VI.'orid

Chapte r 12
p. 29 1: Wil fredo Lee/ A P/ Wide Wo rld Photos: p. 29 3
le}i.: From IV\vIV.dlliIUkos.cOJlJ. Reprinted courtesy
of Daily Kos: p. 293 righL: From ww w.powcr
lilleb/Ofj.colII. Heprinted by permi ssion or PO\\ler

Line: p. 294 left: By perm ission of t he Hou ghton

Li brary/ Harva rd Uni ve rsity: p. 294 ri ght: By permission or the Hough to n Library/ Ha r va rd Un iversity; p. 296: Co rbi s/ Bettm a nn: p. 299: Alex
Wong/ Getty Ne ws: p. 30 3 : The Im a ge Wo rks:
p. 307: A P PhotolBen Ma rgot; p. 309: Brown
Brothers: p. 310 left: UP I/Co rb is/ Bettma nn: p. 3 10
righl.: AI' Pholo/ Dou g Mi lls: p. 311 : © 1991 Dana
Fradon /T he New Yorker Collection frolll cartoo n
ba nk.co m. All rights reserved.

Chapter 13
p. 3 1 6 : Marc C. Burnett/Stock Boston; p. 3 1 8:
Kev in Larma rqu e/Corb is: p. 319 : Ga r y HershornlReutcrs/Corbis: p. 321 le}t: Libra ry or Congress : p. 32 ] cellter: Library of Congress; p. 321
rig lit: A P/ Wide World Photos; p. 322: Library of
Co n gress: p. 324 right: The New York Publi c
Li brary. Astor. Lenox and Ti lden Foundation s:
p. 331: AP Ph oto/Jane Hwang: p. 33 5: Zack Seckler / Corb is: p. 3 41: Alex Wong / Getty Im ages;
p. 3 51: U.S. Hou se of Representa tives: p. 3 56: Ca rtoo o by Ma r k Cullum /The Birmin gh a m News.
Reprinted with permi ssion: p. 36 1: Larry Downin g/ Reuters/Corbis.

Chapter 14
p. 367: Kev in Lamarq ue/ Reu ters/Cor bis: p. 3 69:
Corbi s/Bettm an n: p. 370:
ation a l Pictu res/
Topham/The Ima ge Works: p. 374 left: Library of
Congress: p. 374 rigflt: AP/ Wide World Photos:
p. 375 : The Gra n ger Co llection: p. 379 : M. Reinstein / Pictor; p. 38 7 left: Fra nklin D. Roosevelt
Library; p. 387 righ t: Bob Daemmrieb / PhotoEdit:
p. 389 : Lu c Novovitc h/ Re uters/ Archive Photos;
p. 40(): ©Schwadron -Roth co Cartoons: p. 402 :
Mich ael Eva ns/Th e Whi te House: p. 403 : Wally
McNa mee/Corbis.

Cha pter 1 5
p. 409: Roger Ressmeyer/Corbis; p. 413 left: Smithso nian In stitu tio n: p. 413 right: Ron Sachs/Corbis/ Sygma: p. 417: AP / Wide World Photos; p. 419:
© 1978 Tribu n e Med ia Services Inc. All rights
reserved: p. 425 : With permission of Bob Thaves:
p. 427 : Topha m/The Image Works; p. 431: Steph en
Freey/Liaison /Getty News Images; p. 433: Mary
Kate Denny/ PbotoEdit.

Chapter 16
p. 437: Joe Soh m/The [mage Works: p. 44 1 left:
Li brary or Con gress: p. 44 1 right: National Portrait
Ga llery/ Smith so ni a n [nst ituti on/ Art Resource.
NY; p. 442 left: Library of Con gress: p. 442 center:
The Granger Collection: p. 442 right: Collectio n of
The New-York Historical Society: p. 4 44: Corbis/
Bettma nn: p. 446 : Topham/T he Im age Wor ks:
p. 451: ©Fli p Schulke: p. 453: Ca rl Iwasaki / Lire

CI

C2

Photo Credits

Magazine © 1954 Time. Inc.: p. 456: The Supreme
Court Historica l Society: p. 459: Alex Webb/ Magn um: p. 462: Corbis/ Bettmann.

Bellmann: p. 499 riaht: UP I/ Corbis/ Betlmann:
p. 499 Inr right: Sygma/ Corbis: p. SOl: R. Ell isSygma/Co rbis: p. 502: Bob Daemmri ch / Corb is
Sygma: p. 509: ©Tribu ne Media Services. [nco All
rights reserved. Repri nted wit h permission.

Chapter 17
p. 468: Tom McCarthy/ PhotoEdit: p. 471: Mario
Tama /Getty Images: p. 474: Bill Pu glia no/ Liaison / Getty Images: p. 476: Brown Brothers: p. 477:
Bob Daemmrich /The Image Works: p. 478: Paul
S. Howell / Liaiso n /Getly Im ages: p. 481: Bob
Mahoney/ The [m age Works: p. 483: Corbis/
Bellma nn : p. 485 : Bill Aron / Ph otoEdit.

Chapter 19
p. 511: Tony Freema n/ PhotoEd i!: p. 514: Spencer
Gran t/ Li aiso n/ Getty News Ima ges: p. 517: Topham /The Im age Works: p. 518: CorbislBellmann:
p. 519: Yoichi Okamoto/Lyndon Baines Johnson
Library: p. 522: Sleven Rub in/The Image Works.

Chapter 18

Chapte r 20

p. 491: Doug Mills/ AP/Wide World Photos: p. 496:
Bob Daemmrich /The Image Works: p. 499 fnr left:
Karen Vismara / Black Star: p. 499 left: UPI/Corb is/

p. 529: AI' Pholo/ Wa lly Sa nWna: p. 532: AI'
Pholo/Cristobal Herrera: p. 534: UPI /Co rbi s/
Bettmann; p. 535: National Archives: p. 543: Cor-

bis: p. 544: U.S. Navy: p. 54X: Wa lly McNa mee/Corbis: p. 55 1 i<Jl: Liaison /Getty News Images: p. 55 1
rigllt: R. Ell is/Corbis-Sygma: p. 552 : C. Ni klas Hill.

Chapter 21
p. 559: Ri chard Cumm ins/ Co rbis: p. 565: Red
Soqui /Co rbis: p. 569 le}i: Jack K. Clark /Th e Image
Works: p. 569 right: William Ca mpbell / Corb is/
Sygma: p. 57i: Natalie Fober/ Corbis.

Chapter 22
p. 576: AI Messerschmidt / Folio: p. 579: Dav id
Young-Wolff/P hotoEdit: p. 581: Bob Dacmlllrich /
The Image Works: p. 586: Tony O'Brien /S tock
Boslon: p. 587: Reuters NewMediil Inc./Corbis.

